Abstract
Understanding memory performance in multi-core platforms is a prerequisite to perform optimizations. To this end, this paper presents analytical models based on Stochastic Reward Nets (SRNs) to model and evaluate the memory performance of Non-Uniform Memory Access (NUMA) multi-core architectures. The approach considers the details of the architecture and first proposes a monolithic SRN model that evaluates the memory performance in terms of the mean memory response time. Since the monolithic model incurs a state space explosion with an increasing number of cores and memory controllers, two approximate models are presented that are able to evaluate large-scale NUMA architectures. The SRNs are validated through measurements on two NUMA multi-core platforms, a 64-core AMD Opteron server and a 72-core Intel system. The results demonstrate the ability of the proposed models to accurately compute the mean memory response time on NUMA architectures. The results also provide valuable information that runtime systems and application designers can use to optimize execution of parallel applications on such architectures.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
NUMA architectures

Performance modeling

Stochastic Reward Nets

Approximate models

1. Introduction
To accommodate the ever increasing need for computation power and large data workloads, multi-socket multi-core systems comprising several multi-core processors and memory controllers are being built. A processor interconnect enables the cores in different sockets, called CPU nodes, to access the different memory controllers, named memory nodes. Because of the varying access latency from an individual core to the different memory nodes, such systems are called Non-Uniform Memory Accesses (NUMA) architectures.

Performance analysis of memory accesses is of utmost importance in managing a large number of cores in multi-core systems because the memory system provides limited bandwidth. Based on information about memory performance, runtime systems constrain application parallelism [14], [44] or manage memory bandwidth [27]. Although several models have been proposed to predict memory performance on Symmetric Multi-Processing (SMP) systems [24], [45], NUMA architectures pose additional challenges since the performance of memory accesses is strongly affected by the asymmetric memory system. In such architectures contention can occur at multiple locations, which makes modeling NUMA systems a challenging task. Although analytical models based on queueing systems have been proposed to evaluate the performance of memory accesses in NUMA architectures [10], [43], these models often fail to achieve a high prediction accuracy due to the simplifications made when modeling the relation between the interconnection network and the memory controllers.

This paper presents Stochastic Reward Nets (SRNs) [12], [32] that model the memory system of NUMA architectures in detail. The models are able to evaluate and predict the memory performance of NUMA architectures for a varying number of cores and memory nodes. SRNs are extensions of Stochastic Petri Nets (SPNs) with the advantage that real systems can be specified and evaluated in an intuitive way. Known as a powerful modeling paradigm for performance, availability, and reliability analysis of computing systems, SRNs allow to automatically generate and solve large Markov reward models (MRMs). By applying SRNs to model memory accesses in NUMA architectures, the access latency of different CPU nodes to different memory controllers can be graphically modeled and analytically evaluated. SRNs and the reduction techniques defined on them enable modeling and evaluation of more complex architectures that cannot be easily analyzed with existing state–space models. In this work, we first present a monolithic model for common NUMA architectures. This monolithic model extends primitives that model memory accesses from one core of a CPU node to one memory node into a full system model. Although the monolithic model is helpful to understand memory performance of NUMA architectures, it suffers from a state space explosion at a relatively low number of CPU and memory nodes which makes it difficult to apply the model to existing or future architectures. To overcome this limitation, we present two approximate models with significantly less complexity based on the folding method [20] and the fixed-point iteration technique [40]. The folded model can be applied to existing NUMA machines comprising several CPU and memory nodes but still experiences a state space explosion for larger systems. The fixed-point model, finally, is able to analyze large-scale NUMA machines at the expense of a small reduction in accuracy.

The presented SRN models are validated through experiments on a -core AMD Opteron server with eight memory nodes. Machine-dependent model parameters, such as the data transfer rate of the interconnection links or the service rate of the memory controllers, are determined offline by executing synthetic workloads. The memory access pattern and the last-level cache (LLC) miss rate of an application are extracted by executing the application in isolation. The accuracy of the models is tested by comparing the computed mean memory response time with measurements on the AMD server and a state-of-the-art model based on queueing systems [10]. The results demonstrate that the presented SRNs are good candidates for practical performance evaluation of large-scale NUMA multi-core systems.

The remainder of this work is organized as follows. After a discussion of related work, the architecture of NUMA multi-core systems and its implications on performance modeling are given in Sections 2 Related work, 3 System description. Section 4 introduces Petri nets and the SRN formalism. Section 5 presents the stochastic models used to evaluate memory performance. Section 6 explains the application of the SRN models to a 64-core NUMA multi-core system, and Section 7 analyzes the results of this study. Section 8 applies the models to large-scale NUMA architectures and illustrates future research directions. Section 9, finally, concludes the paper.

2. Related work
A significant portion of research has focused on modeling memory performance of multi/ many-core systems. Kim [24] and Wang [45] present memory performance prediction techniques for SMP architectures. Hong [19] proposes an analytical performance model for GPUs that considers memory hierarchies in GPU architectures. Dao [16] uses a machine-learning based approach for GPU performance modeling. These proposals model memory performance for multi/many-cores by taking the hardware architecture and the performance characteristics of the memory systems into account, but do not consider NUMA architectures comprising multiple memory controllers and the processor interconnection network.

A number of approaches have been presented for the purpose of modeling and the evaluation of the performance of memory accesses in NUMA architectures. Several works apply queueing theory to model the performance of memory accesses in multi-processor systems [42]. Jonkers [22], [23] proposes performance modeling methodologies for parallel applications. Based on a simulation of the hardware architecture, the presented approaches explore the effectiveness of queueing systems for multi-processors consisting of multiple memory servers and an interconnection network. Although such systems did not exist at the time of the publication, the simulated multi-processor systems exhibit almost the same behavior as recent NUMA multi-core architectures. Tudor [43] models memory contention in the memory controller of an SMP system using an M/M/1 queueing model. The memory performance for a varying number of CPU and memory nodes is predicted using linear regression. The approach provides a simple method for modeling memory performance, but does not properly model the processor interconnection network. Cho [10], [11] presents online performance models for NUMA architectures. Separate M/M/1/N/N queueing systems are applied to each memory controller and interconnection link. Although the models can quickly predict the memory performance while applications are running, the separated queueing systems do not properly consider the relationship between the processor interconnection network and memory controllers. A comparison of the presented approach over [10] is given in Section 7.

Curtis-Maury [14] presents a runtime model for power and performance optimization of parallel applications in NUMA architectures. To predict both power and performance of parallel applications in dependence of the number of cores, the performance model applies linear regression using hardware performance counters queried at runtime. Lastovetsky [26] applies functional performance models to formulate the performance and energy consumption of parallel applications in NUMA architectures. Wang [44] proposes an Integer Programming-based method to model core allocation of parallel applications in NUMA architectures with the goal of maximizing memory bandwidth usage by assigning the appropriate number of cores. Cho [9] manages the thread count of co-located parallel applications based on CPU and memory bandwidth utilization predicted by an online performance model [10]. The SRN models presented in this work are orthogonal to previous NUMA performance optimizations and can also be applied to runtime systems to provide an accurate and efficient memory performance model.

3. System description
Fig. 1 depicts a generalized architecture of a typical NUMA multi-socket multi-core system. The architecture consists of several NUMA nodes. Each node contains a CPU node with CPU resources (CPU cores and their private/shared caches) and a memory node comprising a memory controller and memory. The nodes are connected by an interconnection network that enables each CPU core to access every memory node. Interconnection links can exhibit different service times depending on the topology of the interconnect. In Fig. 1, all nodes are connected with a dedicated link (full crossbar). This general architecture can represent direct interconnects, such as Intel’s QuickPath Interconnect [33], and indirect interconnects with irregular latencies as used in AMD’s HyperTransport [37].

The SRN models are tailored to modeling memory performance of scientific memory-intensive workloads. Such workloads have been shown to generate a steady and exponentially distributed memory requests with only few access bursts [10], [43]. These characteristics allow for a number of simplifications in the models without sacrificing accuracy. First, the models assume that a core executes a single thread that is stalled for LLC read misses, and memory requests are processed in First-In-First-Out (FIFO) order. While modern processors support out-of-order execution to avoid stalling for memory requests [25] and memory controllers reorder requests [36], the analytical model is able to predict the mean memory request time for a multitude of memory requests in the steady-state. Second, memory requests that leave the LLC are served by two shared resources: the interconnection link and the memory controller. The presented models consider these two serialization points and compute a mean memory response time that includes the time taken by both the interconnection link and the memory controller.

•
A thread issuing memory accesses is stalled when a read access misses in the LLC.LLC misses trigger a number of memory operations on a memory node.

•
A memory read operation issued by a CPU core completes after being served by both an interconnection link and a memory controller.

•
Multiple memory operations by several CPU cores located behind the same CPU node to the same memory node are serialized in FIFO order.

•
Multiple memory operations by several CPU cores from a single CPU node to different memory nodes do not cause contention because they are served by different interconnection links.

•
Different CPU nodes can issue memory operations to the same memory node. This causes serialization of the requests at the memory controller in a FIFO queue. Since each CPU node has a dedicated interconnection link to every memory node, there is no contention for the interconnection link.

4. Overview of stochastic reward nets
Petri nets (PNs) are mathematical and graphical tools that provide a formal description of systems whose dynamics are characterized by concurrency, parallelism, synchronization, non-determinism, mutual exclusion, and conflict; all typical features of distributed systems [29], [35]. A Petri net can be defined as a 5-tuple, , where

•
 is a finite set of ,

•
 is a finite set of ,

•
 is a set of directed ,

•
 assigns a  to each arc, and

•
 defines the  .

The initial marking  assigns a number of tokens to the places . The transitions and the arcs define how tokens move from place to place. Arcs connect places with transitions and vice-versa. The weight function  defines the multiplicity of an arc. A transition is enabled and can fire if all input places hold at least as many tokens as its input arcs. Upon firing, one token for each input arc is removed from its input place, and one token per output arc is deposited in the corresponding output place.

PNs are represented graphically using four elements [7]. Fig. 2, Fig. 3, Fig. 4, Fig. 5 are examples of such a graphical representation.

•
Places are represented by circles.

•
Transitions are represented by bars.

•
Arcs are shown as directed edges. The multiplicity of an arc is represented with a slash and the weight on the edge. Regular arcs are drawn with an arrow at the head, while an edge with a circle head represents an inhibitor arc.

•
Tokens, if shown, are printed as little dots.

In classical PNs, there is no difference between transitions and each transition can fire as soon as it is enabled, i.e., there is no priority among enabled transitions. Although this definition of PNs is adequate for verifying certain properties of a system, such as liveness, boundedness, or invariance, it is not suitable for a quantitative evaluation of system behavior. In order to allow for a quantitative evaluation, PNs are equipped with a notion of time [18]. Time-augmented PNs can be further classified into Timed Petri Nets (TPNs; time is deterministic) or Stochastic Petri Nets (SPNs; time is stochastic). In SPNs, an exponentially distributed time delay is associated to each transition [5]. To model immediate actions, Generalized SPNs (GSPNs) [30] support immediate and timed transitions. Immediate transitions fire immediately after being enabled, while timed transitions fire after a random, exponentially distributed delay. In the graphical representation of GSPNs, immediate transitions are shown as filled rectangles, while timed transitions are represented by rectangular boxes.

Stochastic extensions were added to GSPNs to permit the indication of reward rates at the net level, resulting in Stochastic Reward Nets (SRNs). An SRN is obtained by associating reward rates with markings of a GSPN [12], [32]. The graphical representation of an SRN is very similar to a GSPN; however, their application is different. SRNs allow the automated generation of Markov Reward Models (MRMs), facilitating the combined evaluation of performance and dependability of degradable fault-tolerant systems. Since the modeling power of SRNs is the same as that of MRMs, the wide range of measures available for MRMs can be easily obtained for SRNs.

The Stochastic Petri Net Package (SPNP) [13] is a well-known tool for numerically solving SRN models. Models are expressed in CSPL (C-based SPN Language), an extension of the C programming language. Advanced features of SPN models are available in SPNP, such as marking-dependent arc multiplicities, enabling functions, arrays of places or transitions, and subnets. Sophisticated steady-state and transient solvers are available including cumulative and up-to-absorption measures. The predefined measures can be easily extended by user-specified expressions. An SRN can be numerically analyzed with SPNP by first assigning reward rates to each marking of the SRN and then by computing the expected rewards. For example, in the steady-state analysis, if  represents the reward rate assigned to a marking  of an SRN model and  denotes the probability of the SRN for being in marking  in the steady-state, then the expected steady-state reward can be computed as .

5. Proposed models
This section describes the SRNs proposed to model and evaluate the Mean Response Time (MRT) of memory accesses in NUMA architectures. In Section 5.1, we first present a basic single-core, single-controller SRN that models a single CPU node with one memory node. This model is then extended to capture the entire system architecture in a monolithic way in Section 5.2. To cope with the state space explosion problem of the monolithic model, two approximate models based on the folding method and the fixed-point iteration technique are proposed in Sections 5.3 Folded model, 5.4 Fixed-point model, respectively.

5.1. Single-core, single-controller SRN model
Fig. 2 shows the structure of the basic SRN to model CPU node , memory node , and the interconnection link connecting  to .  denotes the number of active cores in CPU node . Timed transitions , , and  model the LLC misses triggered by the  cores, the data transfer between CPU node  and memory node , and the service process of memory node , respectively. The memory access pattern of memory-intensive parallel workloads has been shown to follow an exponential distribution [11]; hence, we consider exponential distributions for the firing functions of transitions , , and .


Download : Download high-res image (59KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. SRN model for CPU node , memory node , and the interconnection link.

Initially, there are  tokens in place  to represent the active cores in CPU node  that can trigger an LLC miss. The firing rate of transition , modeling the LLC misses triggered by the cores, is  and can be considered as the inter-request rate of a core to an interconnection link. The pound sign () on the arc connecting place  to transition  denotes that the firing rate is marking dependent, that is, the rate of the transition depends on the number of tokens in the input place and varies over time. Thus, the firing rate of  is , where  denotes the number of tokens in place . When transition  fires, one token is removed from place  and one token is deposited into place . The existence of a token in place  enables timed transition  that models the data transfer through the link connecting CPU node  to memory node . The time associated with transition  is exponentially distributed with rate , where  stands for the mean data transfer time between CPU node  and memory node .

Upon firing transition , a token moves from place  to place  enabling timed transition . The time associated with this transition follows an exponential distribution with rate , where  is the mean time taken by memory node  to serve a memory read/write request. After firing transition , a token is removed from place  and put into place  to indicate that a core has been served by a memory node and can continue processing and generating more memory access requests. This basic SRN model is a simplified case that does not consider contention in a link or a memory node. In this model, a dedicated interconnection link connects CPU node  to memory node , and memory node  serves the requests issued by the cores of CPU node  with FIFO discipline. The basic SRN lays the groundwork for the full system model presented in the next section.

5.2. Monolithic model
To model the NUMA architecture described in Section 3, the single-core, single-controller SRN from Fig. 2 is extended into a monolithic SRN that represents the complete system as shown in Fig. 3. In this SRN, there are  memory nodes and  CPU nodes, and each CPU node  contains  active cores. In the following, the bounds for variables , , and  are , , and , respectively.

Similar to the SRN presented in Fig. 2, place  models CPU node . Each place  contains  tokens representing the active cores in CPU node . The time associated with transition  represents the inter-request time of the cores in CPU node  and is considered to be exponentially distributed with rate . The firing time of transition  is marking dependent, i.e., with  tokens in place , so the firing rate of  is . If there is a token in place , all transitions  are enabled. Similar to related work [10], we assume that all cores are executing the same application and that the data is evenly distributed among the memory nodes. Consequently, the SRN models presented here assume that memory requests are forwarded to the individual memory nodes with equal probability. This is a realistic assumption for NUMA multi-core systems executing applications optimized to utilize all available bandwidth of all memory nodes with parallel programming models such as OpenMP [15]. Since the number of memories is , the token in place  can move to each place  with probability , i.e., the firing probability of each transition  is . Upon firing one of the transitions , place  receives a token. Inhibitor arcs are used to model the fact that the data is equally distributed among the memories and all cores triggering LLC misses experience an equal memory service time. Inhibitor arcs connecting places  to transitions  prevent these transitions from firing when the number of tokens in places  reaches the arc multiplicity . Since there are  memory nodes and  CPU nodes in the system, and each CPU node  contains  active cores, we assign  to each inhibitor arc to balance the load among the memory nodes.


Download : Download high-res image (550KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Monolithic SRN model for the NUMA architectures under study.

The existence of a token in place  enables timed transition , modeling the service time of memory node . After firing  with rate , a token is moved from place  to place . Place  is an auxiliary place helping us to return the tokens exhausted from transitions  to the right places. Without this mechanism, we would not know anymore from which CPU node this request has originated after depositing the token into place . The  immediate transitions  are used to dispatch the tokens of place  to places . A guard function,  as shown in Table 1, is associated with each transition  to ensure that the number of cores in each CPU node does not exceed the predefined value . Therefore, each transition  can fire only when the number of tokens in places  and  is less than . In addition to the guard functions , probability functions  are associated with transitions  as shown in Table 2. These functions ensure that a CPU node  with more active cores than CPU node  has a higher chance to receive tokens from place  because it sends tokens to places  more frequently.

The SRN shown in Fig. 3 can theoretically be used to model any number of CPU and memory nodes and any number of active cores in each CPU node. In practice, however, the model suffers from an exponential state space explosion in the underlying Markov chain of the SRN to the extent that existing tools cannot solve the model anymore. For example, for a system with nine active cores in eight CPU nodes and eight memory nodes, i.e., , , , and , the underlying Markov chain of the monolithic model contains about seven hundred thousand states. By adding only one more active core to the system such that , , the number of states in the underlying Markov chain grows exponentially to over 10 million states. In other words, while the monolithic SRN models the entire system architecture, it is impractical to employ this model to large-scale NUMA systems. In addition, the structure of the net needs to be modified whenever the number of CPU or memory nodes in the system changes. In the following sections, two approximate models are presented that cope with these difficulties.


Table 1. Guard functions of the SRN model represented in Fig. 3.

Guard function	Value
1 ; if 
0 ; otherwise

Table 2. Probability functions of immediate transitions of the SRN model represented in Fig. 3.

Immediate transition	Probability function
Return 
5.3. Folded model
In the monolithic SRN model, the structures of the individual CPU and memory nodes are identical, and LLC misses are redirected with equal probability to each memory node. This symmetry allows us to model the architecture with a folded SRN [20]. In a folded model, only one CPU and one memory node are modeled explicitly (the so-called tagged nodes) while the remaining CPU/memory nodes are folded into a combined sub-model.

Fig. 4 depicts the structure of the folded model. CPU node  is considered to be the tagged CPU node and all remaining  CPU nodes are folded into a submodel labeled folded CPU nodes. In a similar way, memory node  is treated as the tagged memory node and all remaining  memory nodes are folded into submodel folded memory nodes. The tagged CPU node together with the tagged memory node can be used to compute the MRT of a memory access in the system, and the folded CPU nodes and the folded memory nodes are folded sub-models that influence the tagged sub-models.


Download : Download high-res image (404KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Folded approximate SRN model for the NUMA architectures under study.

To fold the monolithic SRN into the folded model, we assign the average of the transition rates to transitions in the folded model. That is, the mean inter-request time of cores, , is set to the average of  from Fig. 3. Similarly, the mean service time of memory nodes is set to . The mean link transition time  is set to the average of all link transition times in the monolithic SRN, i.e., . Since we focus on computing the steady-state MRT of memory accesses in the average case, the impact of these simplifications on accuracy is negligible.

Initially, there are  and  tokens in places  and , respectively. Each token in place  represents an active core in the tagged CPU node. When an LLC miss occurs, a token is moved from place  to place . The existence of a token in place  enables timed transitions  and , representing the interconnection links from the tagged CPU node to the tagged memory node and the folded memory nodes, respectively. Since the interconnection link between tagged CPU node and tagged memory node is a simple link, the firing rate of transition  is . Timed transition , however, is associated with a rate function  that takes the number of folded memories in folded memory nodes into account. Comparing the folded with the monolithic SRN, transition  in Fig. 4 corresponds to transitions ,  and , , in Fig. 3. Since there are  CPU and  memory nodes in the system, each memory can serve at most  requests. This limitation of serving memory read/write requests by the memory nodes is modeled by using the multiplicity of inhibitor arcs connecting places  and  to the four timed transitions  modeling data transmissions. The maximum number of requests that can be served by tagged memory node and folded memory node, labeled  and  in Fig. 4, is defined by Eqs. (1) and (2). (1) (2)

For transition , in addition to the inhibitor arc multiplicity, the number of folded memory nodes and the number of tokens in place  need to be taken into account when transferring data from the tagged CPU node to the folded memory nodes. This is accomplished by the rate function  associated with  as given in Table 3. The  memory nodes are represented by folded memory nodes. Each memory node has a capacity of  requests, hence the number of memories in folded memory nodes with sufficient capacity to host a request from cores of tagged CPU node is given by Eq. (3). (3)where  stands for the number of tokens in place . As the data transfer rate between a CPU node and a memory node is , we multiply Eq. (3) by  to capture the value of , the firing rate of transition .

As shown in Fig. 4, there is contention between timed transitions  and  to grab a token from place . If transition  wins, the token is moved to place ; otherwise,  wins and the token is moved to place . If there is a token in place , timed transition  is enabled and can fire with rate  to represent the serving of a memory request by the tagged memory node. Upon firing , a token is removed from place  and another token is deposited into place . The functionality of place  and its output transitions,  and , are the same as the related components in the monolithic SRN model. Guard functions  and  and probability functions  and , associated with transitions  and , respectively, can be inferred from Table 1, Table 2 by replacing index  with  and .

In the folded sub-model comprising folded CPU nodes and folded memory nodes, the existence of at least one token of  tokens in place  enables timed transition . Since the firing rate of transition  is marking dependent and the number of tokens in folded place  is equal to the number of active cores in  CPU nodes, we do not change the rate . Hence, the rate of  is , where  is the mark of place . Upon firing , place  is fed with a token and both timed transitions  and  are enabled. Transition  redirects memory accesses to tagged memory node and transition  redirects them to folded memory nodes. The two rate functions  and , associated with transitions  and , respectively, are defined in Table 3.

Timed transition  in Fig. 4 corresponds to transitions , , , in Fig. 3. The firing rate of  considers the number of folded CPU nodes to find the number of links connecting those CPU nodes to the tagged memory node. The rate function  first checks the number of tokens in place , denoted by . If that number is less than or equal to , the rate function fires with rate , otherwise with . While transition  folds only  transitions, transition  contains a wide spectrum of folded transitions, corresponding to transitions , , and , of Fig. 3, i.e.,  separate transitions. The firing rate  of  must not only take the number of folded CPU nodes into account, but it also has to consider the number of folded memory nodes and the number of tokens in place . Therefore, the rate function , shown in Table 3, compares the number of tokens in place  with the total capacity of folded memory nodes. If there is enough capacity to host a new request in folded memory nodes, it checks the number of tokens in place  to find the number of interconnection links between folded CPU nodes and memory nodes with sufficient capacity. After computing the number of links and memory nodes with sufficient capacity, rate function  multiplies the total number of existing paths by  to obtain the final value of the rate associated with transition .


Table 3. Rate functions of the folded SRN model represented in Fig. 4.

Rate function	Value
 ; if 
 ; otherwise
 ; if 
 ; otherwise
 ; if 
 ; otherwise
Upon firing transitions  and , a token is moved from place  to places  and , respectively. Place , which accepts tokens from both transitions  and , models the folded memory nodes. The rate function  is associated with this transition to compute its firing rate. As shown in Table 3, function  checks the number of tokens in place . If this number is less than or equal to , i.e., the number of folded memory nodes, it assigns  to , where  is the mark of place ; otherwise, . Therefore, the maximum speed of the folded memory node in serving requests is . After firing transition , a token is put in place  to be returned to  or .

The state space of the folded model grows much slower than that of the monolithic model. The folded model is able to analyze all configurations of the NUMA architecture considered in this paper. Nevertheless, the growth rate of the number of states in the underlying Markov chain of this model is still a concern. As an example, consider a NUMA architecture with eight memory nodes and six CPU nodes with 48 active cores (, , , ). The Markov chain of the this folded SRN model contains around 170 thousand states. Adding eight, then 16 active cores to the system by increasing the number of CPU nodes to 7 and 8, respectively, the number of states reaches 340 and 620 thousand states. To analyze larger NUMA architectures, the following section presents a more scalable model.

5.4. Fixed-point model
To analyze future NUMA architectures with tens of CPU and memory nodes, a scalable approximate model based on the fixed-point iteration technique is presented. The fixed-point iteration technique is a viable approach to analyze systems with interrelated sub-systems [3], [8], [17], [40]. Each sub-system is analyzed separately while the remainder of the system is represented in a simplified manner. The technique iteratively solves the simplified complement of the sub-system and modifies the input parameters of other sub-systems in accordance to the output of the current sub-system. This procedure is repeated until a fixed-point is reached, i.e., the difference between the values of a measure from two successive iterations falls below a given threshold.

From Fig. 4, we observe that the folded model is divided into four parts labeled tagged CPU node, tagged memory node, folded CPU nodes, and folded memory nodes. In the folded model, the tagged memory node and the folded memory nodes act as delays with respect to the other sub-models of the system. In the proposed fixed-point approximate model shown in Fig. 5, the two parts are replaced with two timed transitions labeled  and . The rates assigned to these transitions are determined by considering the folded model. The two remaining parts are used to derive sub-models of the fixed-point SRN model. In Fig. 5, sub-model 1 and sub-model 2, respectively corresponding to the tagged CPU/memory nodes and the folded CPU/memory nodes, have almost the same structure, but their dynamic behaviors and functions are different. To maintain consistency with the folded model, the same names are used for components in the fixed-point model. For the sake of brevity, the components of Fig. 5 that are similar with those introduced in Fig. 4, mostly subscribed by  and , are not described in this section.


Table 4. Rate functions defined for the fixed-point SRN model shown in Fig. 5.


Download : Download high-res image (293KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Fixed-point approximate SRN model for the NUMA architectures under study.

We first describe sub-model 2 which corresponds to folded CPU nodes and folded memory nodes in the folded model. A token in place  enables timed transitions  and . Transition  assigns requests issued from the cores of folded CPU nodes to folded memory nodes, and transition  sends the requests to the tagged memory node. Transition  has the same functionality as in the folded model and its rate is  as shown in Table 3. However, the firing rate of , denoted by , is affected by the number of tokens in place  of sub-model 1 and computed by Eq. (4). (4)where  stands for the probability of tagged memory node being available for the requests sent from folded CPU nodes. This parameter, which is passed from sub-model 1 to sub-model 2, is defined by Eq. (5). (5)where  is the probability that there are less than  tokens in place .

Tokens in place  model the serving of requests in folded memory nodes. The firing rate  of timed transition  is the same as in the folded model and given in Table 3. Similarly, the multiplicity of the inhibitor arc connecting  to , defining the maximum number of requests that can be served by the folded memory nodes, is given by Eq. (2). While timed transition  models accesses to folded memory nodes by the cores of folded CPU nodes, transition  models accesses from the cores of the tagged CPU node. As in the folded model, the rate of redirecting requests from the tagged CPU node to folded memory nodes depends on the number of available memory nodes in the folded  memory nodes. In sub-model 2 of the fixed-point model, the rate of  depends not only on the number of tokens in place  but also on the probability of at least one token being in place , which is the enabling condition of transition  in sub-model 1. Therefore, the firing rate of  is computed by Eq. (6). (6)where  denotes the probability that at least one token is in place . This probability is an output of sub-model 1 and used here as an input for sub-model 2.

When  fires, a token is moved from place  to place . Place  is necessary to properly dispatch the requests served by folded memory nodes to folded CPU nodes. The two outgoing transitions  and  from place  are assigned the probability functions  and  that are identical to those in the folded model. The guard function , assigned to transition , compares the sum of tokens in places  and  with . If the sum is less than , then the guard evaluates to true and both transitions  and  can fire with probabilities  and , respectively. Otherwise, only  fires and empties place . Unlike in the folded model, no guard function is assigned to transition  since it is only used to balance the fraction of tokens redirected to sub-model 2 and empty place  when  is disabled due to an unsatisfied guard.

Place  accepts tokens from both transitions  and . Immediate transition  models the output stream of folded memory nodes to folded CPU nodes, whereas timed transition  models the output stream of the tagged memory node to folded CPU nodes. The guard function  is also associated with  to ensure that the number of tokens in folded CPU nodes does not exceed . The firing rate of 
 depends on the effective firing rate of transition 
 in sub-model 1 and is computed by Eq. (7). (7)
where 
 is the probability of there being at least one token in place 
. The rate functions 
, 
, and 
, finally, are given in Table 4. The functions 
 and 
 are identical to those in the folded model (see Table 3).

In sub-model 1, timed transition 
 models the memory requests from cores in tagged CPU node to folded memory nodes. The firing rate of this transition is affected by the number of tokens in place 
 of sub-model 2 and given in Eq. (8). (8)
where 
, , an output of sub-model 2 and input to sub-model 1, denotes the probability of there being  available memory nodes in folded memory nodes. This probability is computed by Eq. (9). (9)
 
 


Download : Download high-res image (131KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Import graph of the sub-models of the fixed-point model.


Download : Download high-res image (326KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7. The 64-core AMD multi-socket system.

Timed transition 
 models the accesses to tagged memory node by the cores of tagged CPU node, and transition 
 models these accesses by the cores of the folded CPU nodes. The rate of 
 is computed by Eq. (10). (10)
where 
 is the probability of tagged memory node not being full, obtained by Eq. (5), and 
, passed from sub-model 2 to sub-model 1, represents the effective firing rate of transition 
 computed by Eq. (11). (11)
where 
 is the probability that there is at least one token in place 
.

Timed transition 
 shows the serving process of requests by the tagged memory node and its rate is . The functionality of the components 
, 
, 
, and their related functions are the same as the corresponding components and functions introduced for sub-model 2. Place 
 has two lines of token arrivals: immediate transition 
 representing the tokens arriving from tagged memory node, and timed transition 
 modeling the tokens coming from the folded memory nodes. The guard function 
, which is associated with both transitions 
 and 
, ensures that the number of tokens in places 
 and 
 does not exceed the predefined threshold 
. The firing rate of transition 
 depends on the effective firing rate of transition 
 in sub-model 2. According to the firing rate of 
, denoted by 
, the effective rate 
 is computed by Eq. (12). (12)
where 
 is the probability of there being exactly  tokens in place 
. The rate functions 
, 
, and 
 are represented in Table 4.

The iterative solving process starts with arbitrary values for parameters passed between the sub-models. From the second iteration on, input parameters are set according to the output values obtained in the previous iteration. This process continues until the difference between the MRT of a memory access for two successive iterations becomes smaller than a tolerance bound. The MRT obtained in the last iteration is reported as the final result. The import graph, representing the parameters passed between the two sub-models of the fixed-point model, is shown in Fig. 6.

6. Memory performance evaluation of a real NUMA architecture
This section introduces the NUMA machine under test, the target applications, and the methodology used to obtain the input parameters for the proposed SRN models.

6.1. Target NUMA architecture
We validate the proposed models on a 64-core AMD NUMA platform with four AMD Opteron 6380 processors [1]. A block diagram of the architecture is given in Fig. 7. The machine has eight CPU nodes and eight memory nodes. Each CPU node contains eight CPU cores and one shared LLC, and each memory node has one memory controller. All CPU and memory nodes are connected by AMD’s HyperTransport (HT) [37]. The AMD HT interconnection topology is asymmetric and not all nodes are directly connected. As a consequence, the interconnection links between a CPU node and a memory controller observe varying latencies in dependence of the number of hops. The AMD server architecture was chosen over the Intel architecture with its regular QuckPath Interconnect [33] to demonstrate that the presented models can cope with irregular and indirect interconnects that exhibit varying latencies to the different memory nodes.

The layout of the CPU, the memory nodes, and the HT interconnect fit into the generalized NUMA system from Section 3. AMD Opteron processors contain the following two additional shared resources that are not modeled by the generalized NUMA system:

1.
Pairs of neighboring cores, called Compute Units (CU), share the Floating Point Unit (FPU), the first-level Instruction Cache (IC), and the second-level (L2) cache. This can cause contention in these resources between the two cores of a CU.

2.
The shared L3 cache has a limited size. Multiple cores contending for LLC resources can cause a super-linear LLC miss rate.

Section 6.3 addresses these contention points when profiling the parameters of the models.

6.2. Target applications
The proposed SRNs are validated with eight memory-intensive high-performance computing applications. The evaluation uses FT, SP, CG, BT, MG and LU from the NAS Parallel Benchmarks (NPB) version 1 [4]. We use a C implementation of the applications [39]. EP and IS were excluded because these benchmarks generate almost no memory accesses. EP is compute-bound and the working set of IS fits into the on-chip caches. The workloads SpMV (Sparse-Matrix and Vector multiplication) using the Compressed Sparse Row (CSR) format and Pagerank from the GraphBIG benchmark [34] represent two workloads from the machine-learning and big data application domain. To obtain the hardware-dependent parameters, the Stream Write microbenchmark from Stream benchmark [31] is used. Stream Write generates memory read and write operations with a configurable stride pattern and is a completely memory-bound with no computation or opportunities for caching.

6.3. Extracting model parameters
To validate the proposed SRNs in terms of the mean memory response time  for a given number of cores, one workload is executed with a varying number of active cores. Each core is assigned a constant amount of work. An increasing number of active cores causes more contention in the interconnection network and the memory nodes, which in turn leads to a longer  and a higher workload turnaround time. We defined the turnaround time () as shown in Eq. (13). (13)  represents the workload’s execution time for the assigned work excluding the time spent for memory accesses. The time consumed by memory accesses is computed by multiplying the number of LLC misses () by the mean memory response time (). The value of  is obtained by dividing the total memory response time by the number of LLC misses as shown in Eq. (14). (14)
 
The  obtained from experiments on the AMD machine is compared with the value computed by the SRN models.

To compute the workload-specific model parameter , each workload is executed in isolation on one CPU core and its local memory node to measure the turnaround time of the workload, 
, and the number of LLC misses, 
, obtained from the hardware’s performance counters [2]. The two parameters are used to compute the value of . If the target platform has additional sources of shared-resource interference, more information about the workload may be required. In the following, we show how to compute the  for the AMD architecture with the aforementioned shared resources (Section 6.1).

A workload’s inter-request rate  represents the number of LLC misses per time unit from a core in the steady-state and is defined by Eq. (15). (15)
 

 represents the average of per-core LLC misses for all allocated cores. Let 
 denote the average number of LLC misses of the 
 CPU cores in CPU node . Then,  is computed by Eq. (16) as follows. (16)
 

On our target architecture, each CPU node contains at most eight cores, and 
 changes for larger numbers of active cores due to LLC interference. To consider this interference, we execute the workload using all  cores of a CPU node and measure the number of LLC misses. 
 represents the average number of LLC misses observed by one core under full load and is computed by dividing the LLC misses by . The average number of LLC misses for a given 
 is interpolated from the difference between the LLC misses for one and eight cores, 
 as shown in Eq. (17). (17)
 

Interference in the CUs and the LLC can affect the .  is computed using Eq. (18) (18)
where 
 represents execution time on one CPU core without any interference, and 
 and 
 represent the overhead of CU and LLC interference, respectively.

To compute 
, we use the values of 
 and 
 obtained from the initial profiling run using one core. According to Eq. (13), 
 is computed by Eq. (19) as follows. (19)
where 
 is obtained by executing Stream Write. Since Stream Write has no computations or cache hits, we can simply measure its mean memory response time.

To determine 
, the turnaround times of two runs, one using two cores in the same CU, the other one using two cores from separate CUs, are compared. The difference, denoted by , captures the time caused by interference in a CU. The average overhead of interference caused by resource sharing in a CU is then given by Eq. (20). (20)
 
 

To account for interference in the LLC, 
 computes the time increase by considering the difference of the number of LLC misses as shown in Eq. (21). (21)

Workloads may experience a longer CPU time with an increasing number of LLC misses caused by interference (capacity misses) in the LLC. Based on measured results with 1 and the maximum number of available cores in a CPU node, , we set  to the empirically determined value  if 
. Otherwise, . A sophisticated scheme may provide better accuracy, however, the effect of 
 on accuracy has been found to be marginal.

The machine-dependent parameters 
, representing the data transfer rate between CPU node  and memory node , and 
, the service rate of memory node , are computed by considering the different link transfer times in the NUMA interconnection network. The Stream Write benchmark is employed to discover the different interconnection link transfer times by executing Stream Write on one CPU core and accessing all possible memory controllers while measuring the transfer/service times of the different links.

7. Numerical evaluation
The presented models are evaluated using the Stochastic Petri Net Package (SPNP) [13] in the steady-state. The measure of interest is the MRT of a memory access. For the folded and the fixed-point model, this measure is computed for the cores in the tagged CPU node and is obtained by applying Little’s law [41] to both the interconnection link and the tagged memory node. The monolithic model does not have an explicitly tagged CPU node, hence any of the CPU nodes, its interconnection link and memory node can be chosen.

The accuracy of the models is given as the Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) (22)
 
 
where 
 represents the actual value obtained from the measurement on a real system, and 
 is the value computed by the analytic model. MAPE is a popular statistical measure of a forecast systems’ accuracy. As a measure of error, lower values represent higher prediction accuracy; the mean absolute percent accuracy is obtained by subtracting the MAPE from 1. MAPE has been chosen due to its advantages of scale-independence and interpretability. Another popular metric that quantifies the similarity of two sets of values is 
, computed as the square of the correlation between the predicted and the actual values. The 
 metric may show unintuitive behavior in situations where the trend of actual data values is close to linear. This can lead to seemingly bad 
 values despite small absolute errors and a strong visual correlation between the predicted and the actual values. The presented SRN models are compared a multi-level queueing system recently proposed by Cho [10] that models the interconnection link and the memory controller using a M/M/1/N/N queueing system.

Table 5, Table 6 list the input parameters of the models along with the observed values in our experiments. Table 5 gives the data transfer rate for each memory interconnection link and the service rate of a memory controller; the values were measured using the Stream Write microbenchmark. The link transfer rate  used in the folded and fixed-point SRN models is set to the average of the individual link transfer rates. Table 6 lists the LLC miss rate  of one CPU core for all target applications. Note that the value of  changes in dependence of the number of active cores. All hardware-dependent parameters are computed as described in Section 6.3. The SRN models are evaluated using three different scenarios with a varying number of CPU cores and memory nodes.


Table 5. Architecture-specific parameters of the models.

Parameter	Distance to memory node	Rate (μ)
0 hops: local access	285.7
1 hop: remote access within same processor	142.9
1 hop: remote access to different processor	90.9
2 hops: remote access to different processor	49.3
, 	–	87.0

Table 6. Application-specific parameters of the models.

Rate (req./us)	Stream write	FT	SP	CG	BT	MG	LU	SpMV	Pagerank
1235	12	32	57	7	40	45	49	27
7.1. One memory node, varying number of cores
In a first scenario, performance is evaluated for one memory node with an increasing number of active cores. The memory-intensive application Stream Write is used to validate the SRN models for this heavily congested scenario. Fig. 8 shows the computed and measured MRT from 1 to 64 cores obtained by solving the presented monolithic and folded models together with the data gathered from the experiments on the 64-core AMD system. The memory controller and the interconnection link are saturated at a small number of active cores, consequently, the MRT increases almost linearly with the number of cores. The presented folded model achieves a MAPE of 0.13 and is significantly more accurate than the queueing-based model presented in [10] with a MAPE of 0.25. As visible in Fig. 8, the SPNP tool cannot solve the monolithic model for more than  cores because of a state space explosion in the underlying Markov chain. The fixed-point model cannot be applied to this scenario because it requires the number of CPU and memory nodes to be bigger than one.


Download : Download high-res image (159KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 8. MRT of Stream Write for one memory node and a varying number of cores (Section 7.1). The values show the MAPE of the models against actual measurements. The MAPE of the monolithic model is not reported because it cannot be solved by the SPNP tool for more than  cores.

7.2. One CPU node, varying number of memory nodes
In this second scenario, one CPU node with eight active cores is paired with one to eight memory nodes. Fig. 9 presents the results of this scenario for the eight target applications. Similar to the first scenario, the fixed-point model cannot be evaluated for only a single CPU node. We observe that by increasing the number of memory nodes, the mean response time of memory accesses decreases. The results shown in Fig. 9 demonstrate the prominence of the presented models in estimating the MRT of memory accesses against the previously presented approach [10]. The queueing system-based approach fails to capture the trend of the MRT for the majority of all applications, while both the monolithic and the folded model consistently capture the trend of the MRT and outperform the queueing-based model by a significant margin. The simple architecture model of the queueing system matches the setup with one CPU node and one memory node well, while the SRN models, built for multiple CPU and memory nodes, underestimate the MRT in this case. With an increasing number of memory nodes the SRN models clearly outperform the queueing system-based approach.


Download : Download high-res image (933KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 9. MRT of memory-intensive applications for one CPU node and a varying number of memory nodes (Section 7.2). The values in the plot show the MAPE of the models against the measurements.

7.3. Eight CPU and memory nodes, varying number of cores
The third scenario analyzes the performance of the memory system for configurations using all eight CPU and memory nodes of the 64-core AMD architecture. The application’s memory data is distributed equally among the eight memory nodes, and the number of allocated CPU cores is varied from  to . Active cores are distributed to CPU nodes in a round-robin fashion, i.e., core  is allocated to CPU node ; on the AMD system . With this allocation, interference in the LLCs starts with core 9 and in the CUs with core 33. The allocation also matches the symmetry of core allocation assumed by the folded and fixed-point model.


Download : Download high-res image (1MB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 10. MRT of memory-intensive applications for a varying number of cores with interference modeling on the 64-core AMD system. The values in the plots represent the MAPE. No MAPE is given for the monolithic model as the SPNP tool cannot solve the model for more than 8 cores.


Download : Download high-res image (980KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 11. MRT of memory-intensive applications for a varying number of cores with interference modeling on the 72-core Intel system. The monolithic model cannot be solved for more than 8 cores.

Fig. 10 shows the results of this scenario for the eight target applications. The monolithic model can only be evaluated for up to 8 due to the state space explosion. Both approximate models are able to evaluate all configurations of the 64-core AMD system. We observe that the presented SRN models are able to model the MRT of the system with good accuracy with moderate MAPE values from 0.06 to 0.34. Small measured MRT values leading to large relative errors even for small prediction errors of around μ are the cause for the highest MAPE of 0.34 observed for BT with the folded model; nevertheless, the SRN models capture the trend of the MRT for BT well as can be observed in Fig. 10. The SRN models consistently outperform the queueing system-based approach [10] and succeed at predicting the trend of the memory response time well. We observe that the models show a slightly larger error with a higher number of active cores; the most prominent example is the LU application with 48 to 64 cores. This divergence is caused by the simple interference modeling (Section 6.3) rather than a systematic limitation of the SRN models. The LU and SpMV applications generate a high volume of memory reads that lead to contention in the LLCs. Although the presented models show a higher error for LU and SpMV compared to other workloads, such as FT, that have less intra-node inference, the prediction accuracy is acceptable. Our approach for modeling intra-CPU node interference is based on a direct measurement and analysis methodology similar to [28]. The large shared caches of modern processors render achieving high accuracy from direct measurements a challenge. Interference modeling can potentially produce more accurate results with shared cache partitioning, however, cache partitioning requires modifications to the hardware [38] or suffers from a runtime overhead.

The generality of the presented approach is demonstrated by applying it to a 72-core Intel Xeon NUMA system comprising four Intel Xeon E7-8870 v3 processors [21] each with 18 cores and 45MB of LLC. Fig. 11 plots the results of the models for the target NPB applications, SpMV (CSR format), and Pagerank (Brin and Page’s algorithm [6]). Since the Intel system has more cores and fewer memory nodes compared to the AMD system (72 vs. 64 cores; 4 vs. 8 memory nodes), the peak MRT is significantly higher on the Intel platform. For most scenarios, the presented models outperform the queueing-based model with modest errors on both the AMD and Intel system, showing the strength of the presented modeling approach. Comparing the results of the two systems, we observe a larger error on the Intel platform for a number of applications such as CG and SpMV. The reason for this behavior is differences in the interconnection network and memory-level optimizations that are abstracted away by the SRN models.

7.4. Complexity analysis and speed of convergence
An important concern of SRN models is the number of states and non-zero entries of the generated Markov chains. This computational complexity directly affects the solvability of the models in terms of space and time requirements. Except for the simplest scenario with only one CPU node (Section 7.1), the monolithic model is unable to solve the other scenarios for a larger number of active cores (Fig. 8, Fig. 10). The number of states and non-zero entries of the generated Markov chain matrices are given in Fig. 12 for the scenario from Fig. 10. The results show that the folded model reduces the complexity of the underlying Markov model and can thus handle all situations considered in the -core machine. Nevertheless, for high-end or future architectures with more CPU and memory nodes, the state space explosion also affects the folded model. This limitation is mitigated by the scalable fixed-point model, rendering it adequate to model large-scale systems. Fig. 13 shows the speed of convergence of the fixed-point model to the final result for  active cores and  memory nodes. In this figure, the initial values of the input parameters of the model are set to different values to show that all settings converge to the same result after only few iterations. As described in Section 5.4, we solve the interactive sub-models until the difference between the MRTs of two consecutive iterations is less than a given tolerance bound. While this bound has an influence on the number of iterations before the model stops, less than 10 iterations are sufficient to obtain the final result.


Download : Download high-res image (297KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 12. The size of the Markov chains generated by the proposed SRN models.


Download : Download high-res image (953KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 13. The convergence speed of the proposed fixed-point model over iterations.

8. Modeling larger systems and future directions
This section first applies the fixed-point SRN model to large-scale NUMA systems to demonstrate the applicability of the model to predict the performance of future systems, before discussing extensions of the presented models and directions for future work.

8.1. Modeling larger systems
The scalability of the fixed-point model is a helpful attribute for users to evaluate memory performance for larger NUMA systems. Solving the fixed-point model allows us to predict the MRT with an increasing number of cores, CPU nodes, and memory nodes beyond what are physically available, providing helpful guidelines for hardware developers of future NUMA systems. Fig. 14 plots the results of the fixed-point SRN model for four different configurations. Each configuration employs a different number of cores per CPU node and/or memory nodes. We use the data transfer rate obtained on the -core AMD machine and the per-core memory access rates measured for memory-intensive applications in Table 6 to perform the modeling. This study provides some insights for analysts. First, comparing configurations with  memory nodes (configuration –) to those with  memory nodes (configuration –), we obtain the expected result that the MRT increases more slowly when more memory nodes are available. Independent of the number of memory nodes, once the memory system is saturated the growth of the MRT becomes almost linear. The presented models can thus be used to estimate when the memory system is saturated and to select an adequate number of cores for an application that does not overcommit CPU resources. Moreover, the models also make it possible to select the adequate number of memory nodes for a given application. For example, for FT on  cores, the model reveals that  memory nodes are sufficient because the MRT up to  cores is almost identical regardless of the number of memory nodes. Such an analysis assists users in selecting the adequate hardware configuration when renting computational resources in a data center. Interestingly, comparing configuration  ( cores per node) and  ( cores per node), we observe that for the same number of total cores the MRT increases more slowly with the simpler CPU node configuration ( cores per node). This implies that it is better to scale-out the CPU node architecture if we can optimize an application to equally utilize all memory nodes. The same observation is not prominent between configuration  and  because the memory systems of both configurations are saturated at a relatively small number of cores.


Download : Download high-res image (1MB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 14. MRT of memory-intensive applications for larger systems and different NUMA system configurations.

8.2. Directions for future work
The monolithic, folded and fixed-point SRNs presented in this paper model homogeneous computing cores with NUMA memory nodes. Although the models can appropriately model NUMA systems and evaluate the MRT of existing systems, they have some limitations. The SRN models employ an analytical approach to predict speedup, which is a simplification of a complex real-world problem that only considers the core characteristics of the system. This causes the models to show a relatively low prediction accuracy for some applications, such as SpMV and LU. Considering the behavior of these applications, it should be noted that the proposed models do not properly model the complex interactions of all parts of the system such as, for example, interference in the CUs or LLCs (see Eq. (18)). Furthermore, since the connections between the components of the SRN models are wired-down and do not change, the models can only be applied to systems with similar memory architectures. Extending the models to more accurately model interference in the CUs and LLC is one possible direction for future work.

A second open research problem is to extend this approach to heterogeneous computing systems and distributed systems. Referring to the monolithic model in Fig. 3, we observe that there is no assumption about the physical location of the memory nodes; the timed transitions 
 model the time required to access a memory node. To model distributed memory systems, these timed transitions need to be replaced by a series of places, arcs, and transitions that model physically remote memory accessible through a network. The processing speed of a CPU core is modeled using the timed transitions 
. To accommodate heterogeneous processing cores, the rate of these transitions can be adjusted to represent the different processing speed of the cores.

Another future direction of research applies the presented models to maximize the performance of parallel applications. The models can help to determine the optimal number of cores that maximizes the overall performance of an application. Another possibility is to employ the proposed SRN models in a job scheduler. The scheduler can base its scheduling decisions on the results of the models predicting the performance and/or utilization of the memory system.

9. Conclusions
Understanding memory performance in multi-core platforms is a prerequisite to perform optimizations. This paper has presented an analytical approach based on SRNs to model and evaluate the performance of memory accesses in NUMA architectures. A monolithic model considering the entire system provides the intuition to understand memory accesses in the system. For practical applications of the proposed approach, two approximation models are proposed for larger numbers of CPU cores and memory nodes. The validation of the models on a -core AMD Opteron server and a 72-core Intel platform and a comparison to a previously published NUMA performance model shows that the proposed SRN models are able to accurately evaluate memory performance of existing NUMA machines.

The input parameters of the models are architecture- and application-specific. The architecture-specific parameters, including data transfer rates of interconnection links and the service rate of the memory controllers, can be measured by running a synthetic workload. The application-specific parameters, such as the LLC miss rate per core, is obtained by profiling an application. Based on these values, the proposed SRN models can evaluate the performance of memory accesses on various NUMA system configurations.

