Abstract
We are thrilled and delighted to present this special issue, which emphasizes on the novel area of Enabling Technologies for Energy Cloud. This guest editorial provides an overview of all articles accepted for publication in this special issue.

Previous
Keywords
Energy cloud

Machine learning

Artificial intelligence

Cybersecurity

Networks security

Cyber–physical systems

1. Aims & Scope
While distributed renewable energy resources continue to grow exponentially, and the grid becomes more digitized, the utilities’ customer relationships and their operations get even more complex. The more evolution of dynamic demand–response, smart homes and billing, and social media applications will significantly change the way utilities interact with customers (e.g., utilities’ customers have started to act as prosumers by generating their own power and sell it back to the national electricity supplier). The traditional age-old grid supports one-way flow of energy from centralized generation to end consumers, which is not the optimum operational model nowadays. In order to provide two-way energy flows (i.e., grid–consumer–grid and consumer–consumer), we need to move away from hub-and-spoke model toward a multidirectional giant network-of-networks called Energy Cloud. The ability to adapt to the large-scale changing environment of Energy Cloud allows consumers to connect essentially all electrical devices from the supply grid to the individual users into one giant Energy Cloud network. However, the optimization of Energy Cloud is a challenge and requires further research and development to significantly reduce the total energy cost and build a secure, and stable network.

The aim of this special issue is to bring together researchers from academia, industry, and individuals working on relevant research areas to share their latest accomplishments and research findings within the research community.

This special issue received a large number of submissions, which were well aligned with the theme of Enabling Technologies for Energy Cloud. Those submissions came from diverse researchers from academia, industry, and individuals, from all over the globe. Firstly, all submissions have been screened closely by the editors to check their suitability with the special issue’s list of topics. Secondly, after multiple rounds of peer-review, only 17 high-quality submissions have been accepted for publication in this special issue.

Those accepted papers address the Enabling Technologies for Energy Cloud theme from different perspectives and angles which are categorized into (i) security and privacy, (ii) Artificial Intelligence (AI) and machine learning, (iii) Software Defined Network (SDN) and networking, and (iv) optimization, QoS and performance. An overview of the accepted manuscripts is presented in the following paragraphs, and according to the category that the paper has been accepted under.

2. Security and privacy
The authors of [12] propose extensions to database systems to allow applications that are used in managing the operations of Energy Clouds, to safely delegate the security and privacy policies to the database, whereas the authors in [10] present a decentralized AI-based Energy Cloud management system framework for energy management by using blockchain. The paper shows how blockchain and AI can be used together to mitigate Energy Cloud management with security and privacy issues. This research paper concluded with the open research issues and challenges of the blockchain AI-based Energy Cloud management system. The authors in [1] discuss why Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks are a serious threat to Energy Clouds and smart grid infrastructure and propose a new Flash-based gaming CAPTCHA to differentiate bots from humans and hinder the DoS attack in smart grid infrastructure. Also, Abbas Yazdinejad et al. in [17] discuss the secure routing with untrusted devices in Software Defined Network (SDN) –based Energy Cloud critical infrastructure and propose a new algorithm to determine the optimal number of replicated devices to minimize the cost of implementing secure routing in spite of the presence of untrusted devices in SDN-based Energy Cloud critical infrastructure.

The authors in [13] propose a hybrid anomaly-based Intrusion Detection System (IDS) that can be installed at any networked site of the Internet of Energy architecture, such as Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI), to counteract security attacks. The proposed system reduces the overall classification time of detection compared to the existing hybrid methods. The solution uses a combination of K-means and Support Vector Machine (SVM), where the K-means centroids are used in a unique training method that reduces the training and testing times of the Support Vector Machine without compromising classification performance. The author in [8] proposes and evaluates an edge computing-based framework that aims to efficiently manage and optimize Energy Cloud systems while increasing their reliability, safety, and security. The proposed framework exploits the current expansion in computing capabilities of the edge computing and the Fifth Generation (5G) mobile communication technology. The evaluation of the proposed framework shows that an edge computing infrastructure improves the service efficiency by 22.6% compared with a cloud infrastructure. Furthermore, the latency is reduced by 69.1%. The proposed framework provides threat detection capability by using the edge layer as an extra layer for defence against Energy Cloud system attacks. However, this defence mechanism incurs 10.9% overhead and 9.6% extra delay per service request on average.

3. AI and machine learning
The authors in [10] present a unique integration of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and blockchain for Energy Cloud management. This fusion helps in mitigating the various issues encountered by the Energy Cloud system at the runtime including security issues, as mentioned above. Besides, Swarna Priya R.M. et al. [16] propose Energy Efficient Cloud-based Internet of Everything (EECloudIoE) architecture, which acts as an initial step in integrating these two wide areas thereby providing valuable services to the end users. The proposed clustering of IoE is further compared with the widely used state of the art techniques like Artificial Bee Colony (ABC) algorithm, Genetic Algorithm (GA) and Adaptive Gravitational Search algorithm (AGSA). The results justify the superiority of the proposed methodology outperforming the existing approaches with an increased life-time and reduction in traffic. An energy-aware mechanism is applied to optimize mobile cloud service composition using a hybrid Shuffled Frog Leaping Algorithm and Genetic Algorithm (SFGA) has been presented in [7]. Experimental results capture that the proposed mechanism improves the feasibility of the service composition with minimum energy consumption, response time, and cost for mobile cloud components against some current algorithms.

The authors in [11] present a novel survey on the integration of various techniques including Software Defined Network (SDN) and Machine Learning in the context of Energy Cloud. With the aid of Machine Learning (ML) technologies, SDC can achieve learning-based models, flexible deployment, and early detection and schedule of elephants for the optimization of network performance and energy usage dynamically and intelligently. A new distributed multi-agent framework based on the three layers’ fog computing architecture is developed for real-time microgrid economic dispatch and monitoring by the authors in [3]. To this end, the changes of load at any time will be tracked by the proposed technique, considering unit sudden exits and entries. Moreover, to make the system more realistic, different renewable energies, including Photovoltaics (PVs), Wind Turbines (WTs), Fuel Cells (FCs), and MicroTurbines (MT) are considered in the proposed technique. To overcome the complexity of the problem, by using the advantages of fog computing, a new fast consensus-based optimization algorithm is used, which is modified based on the fuzzy adaptive leader technique. Finally, the proposed technique is simulated and tested on microgrids with 6 and 14 buses, respectively. Simulation results demonstrate and validate the effectiveness of the proposed technique, as well as the capability to track the changes of load with the interactions in real-time and the fast convergence rate.

4. SDN and networking
As mentioned above, the authors in [17] introduce a new algorithm to secure routing with untrusted devices in Software Defined Network (SDN) –based Energy Cloud critical infrastructure. The new algorithm helps in controlling the optimal number of replicated devices in order to minimize the cost of implementing secure routing in spite of the presence of untrusted devices in SDN-based Energy Cloud critical infrastructure. The presented results show that the proposed algorithm decreases implementation cost by 27% and increases the reliability from 70% to 93.2%, when compared to the base method.

Alwasel et al. in [2] present the first ever simulator (IoTSim-SDWAN) that facilitates the modelling, simulating, and evaluating of new algorithms, policies, and designs in the context of SD-WAN ecosystems and SDN-enabled multiple cloud data centres. IoTSim-SDWAN simulator is evaluated for network performance and energy to illustrate the difference between classical WAN and SD-WAN environments. The simulator results show that SD-WAN surpasses the classical WAN in terms of accelerating traffic flows and reducing power consumption. The authors in [15] propose an energy and spectrum aware unequal cluster-based routing (ESUCR) protocol intending to resolve the issues of clustering and routing in a distributed network of sensor nodes, which senses event signals and collaboratively communicates over dynamically available spectrum bands in a multi-hop mode. In ESUCR, cluster formation is mainly performed considering the residual energy of the secondary users and relative spectrum awareness such that the common data channels for clusters are selected based on the appearance probability of Primary Users. ESUCR performs energy-efficient channel sensing by deciding the channel state with the statistic previous channel states.

The authors in [11] discuss the sequences of packets that contribute only 10% of the total volume but consume over 90% of the network bandwidth — namely, Elephant flows (elephants). They discuss a number of relevant issues including (1) each host and switch in the network need to be customized, and (2) dynamic models and advanced policies are difficult to be applied. The authors use Software Defined Cloud (SDC) to address these issues by enabling controller-based approaches. For this purpose, this article stresses the significance of models describing elephants, surveys the mechanisms that may apply to the model, detect, and schedule elephants for SDC to optimize the network performance and energy usage. Also, the authors in [6] propose a secure application management framework based on REST API access control in SDN-enabled Energy Cloud environment.

The authors in [9] propose a novel scheme, “Energy Efficient Adaptive Scheduling Scheme (EASS) for Mesh Grid Wireless Sensor Networks”. In EASS, a sensor node configures and schedules its functions/roles according to the contents of sensed data packets and the frequency of generated traffic. Like Energy Cloud, tasks are uniformly distributed on all nodes in mesh-grid in four states – each state of a node is responsible for configuring its components on a specific energy level – which aims to avoid link disconnection and vanish redundant data packets generation. Simulation results show that EASS increases energy-efficiency by 50% due to the four-states model, 62.5% due to alive nodes, 92.60% due to minimized Cluster-Heads overhead and 38.11% due to the reduction in dead nodes ratio.

5. Optimization, QoS and performance
Devaraj et al. introduce in [4] the fusion of Firefly and Improved Multi-Objective Particle Swarm Optimization (FIMPSO) algorithm, which helps achieving effective average load for making and enhancing the measures of proper resource usage and response time of the tasks over Energy Cloud. FIMPSO achieved outstanding results when compared to the state-of-the-art methods with the least average response time of 13.58 ms, maximum CPU utilization of 98%, memory utilization of 93%, reliability of 67% and throughput of 72%.

Pejman Hosseinioun et al. propose in [5] an energy-aware task scheduling approach to minimize energy consumption in fog computing. Presenting a hybrid Invasive Weed Optimization (IWO) along with the Cultural Evolution Algorithm (CEA) for the proposed task scheduling approach in fog computing. The proposed scheduling approach guarantees optimal solutions for energy-aware task scheduling approach based on the maximum level of QoS factors.

The authors in [14] propose EdgeKV, a decentralized storage system designed for the network edge. EdgeKV offers fast and reliable storage, utilizing data replication with strong consistency guarantees. With a location-transparent and interface-based design, EdgeKV can scale with a heterogeneous system of edge nodes. The authors implement a prototype of the EdgeKV modules in Golang and evaluate it in both the edge and cloud settings on the Grid’5000 testbed. The prototype utilizes the Yahoo! Cloud Serving Benchmark (YCSB) to analyse the system’s performance under realistic workloads. The evaluation results show that EdgeKV outperforms the cloud storage setting with both local and global data access with an average write response time and throughput improvements of 26% and 19% respectively under the same settings.