Abstract
This study proposes an integrated technology acceptance model to investigate the factors that affect drivers’ usage intention of mobile navigation applications. The proposed model adds three new constructs (drivers’ sense of direction, navigation application affinity and distraction perception) to the original technology acceptance model based on the features of mobile navigation applications. First, a questionnaire was developed and administered, and data from 384 drivers were collected via an online survey. Second, confirmatory factor analysis was conducted to examine the reliability and validity of the developed scale based on the collected data. Third, a structural equation model was constructed to investigate the interrelationships among these constructs in the conceptual research model and to identify the key factors that affect drivers’ acceptance of mobile navigation applications. The proposed model explained 60.50% of the variance in the intention to use mobile navigation applications. In addition to attitude and perceived usefulness, navigation application affinity and distraction perception also significantly affected drivers’ intention to use mobile navigation applications. Navigation application affinity and distraction perception affected not only drivers’ intention to use but also their perceptions. Sense of direction was a significant individual trait that affected drivers’ navigation application affinity, distraction perception, perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness. These findings imply that relevant developers should continually optimize the incorrect and inappropriate use of navigation information and that they should attach importance to the amount and intelligibility of navigation information. Furthermore, the prompt form of navigation information should satisfy the demands and expectations of drivers with different senses of direction. Overall, this study improves our understanding of drivers’ acceptance of mobile navigation applications and provides some important practical implications to improve mobile navigation services.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Mobile navigation applications

Technology acceptance model

Sense of direction

Navigation application affinity

Distraction perception

1. Introduction
Advances in positioning, geographic information and communication technologies enable navigation products to provide instructions to drivers, which makes driving more convenient. Currently, the navigation products used in vehicles mainly include in-vehicle navigation systems (such as FlyAudio and CASKA), portable navigation devices (such as Garmin and TomTom) and mobile navigation applications (such as Google Maps, Gaode Maps and Baidu Maps). These three types of navigation products are shown in Fig. 1, Fig. 2, Fig. 3. A survey indicated that 49.6% and 22.1% drivers use mobile navigation applications and the other two navigation products, respectively (Zheng, 2019). Obviously, mobile navigation applications are far more attractive to drivers, which may be attributed to their low cost, easy update methods and high precision. With the increasing popularity of mobile navigation applications, it is necessary to explore the factors that affect drivers’ acceptance of mobile navigation applications, which refers to the degree to which an individual intends to use a system (Adell, 2014), and to further provide theoretical support for the improvement and promotion of mobile navigation applications.

Fig 1
Download : Download high-res image (241KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. In-vehicle navigation.

Fig 2
Download : Download high-res image (252KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Portable navigation.

Fig 3
Download : Download high-res image (104KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Mobile navigation.

The technology acceptance model (TAM), proposed by Davis et al. (1989), is one of the most widely used and successful models to explore the user acceptance of particular systems (Park and Kim, 2014), and it has been applied in many previous studies (Yu et al., 2005; Gentry and Calantone, 2002; Lyu et al., 2017; Rahman et al., 2017). The TAM comprises four constructs, and the connections among these constructs are shown in Fig. 4. Davis and his colleagues introduced definitions of the four constructs in the TAM (Davis 1989, 1993; Davis et al., 1989). Perceived usefulness is defined as the degree to which people believe that overall job performance can be enhanced by a particular system or technology. Perceived ease of use is defined as the degree to which people believe that using a particular system or technology is free from physical and mental effort. Attitude is defined as the preference of people when they utilize a particular system or technology. Intention to use is defined as the degree of the cognitive and psychological state of people's general and overall minds to employ a particular system or technology. The flexibility of the TAM model is that it can be used to assess the importance of many constructs and relationships not included in the original model, which are represented as the external variables in Fig. 4.

Fig 4
Download : Download high-res image (156KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. The original technology acceptance model (Davis, 1989).

Based on the theoretical framework of the TAM, some scholars have explored users’ acceptance of navigation products. Chen et al. (Chen and Chen, 2011) investigated the factors that affect travelers’ usage intentions of in-vehicle GPS products and examined the moderating effect of personal innovativeness on the relationship between attitude and behavior intention. Another study (Park and Kim, 2014) introduced a new integrated model that analyzes driver acceptance of car navigation systems and includes locational accuracy, processing speed, service and display quality. Xu et al. (2010) used an extended TAM that incorporated information attributes, travel information trust, sociodemographics and alternate route cognition to assess the acceptance of advanced traveler information systems. Park et al. (2012) examined the role of the TAM in predicting mobile map service users’ attitudes toward the service, and the results showed that perceived mobility and perceived locational accuracy significantly influenced user acceptance and intention to use mobile map services. The above research demonstrates that existing studies have all proposed several new constructs related to navigation systems and users and have revealed the effects of these new constructs on user perceptions, attitudes and usage intentions of navigation systems. These studies demonstrated the applicability of the extended TAM framework for navigation system assessment and its ability to more deeply analyze the background and structure of users’ acceptance than simpler frameworks. However, it is noteworthy that these studies on navigation product acceptance have focused more on in-vehicle navigation systems than on mobile navigation applications. At present, the use of mobile navigation applications is more common, and mobile navigation applications have some different characteristics than in-vehicle navigation systems, such as a smaller display screen and timely updates; thus, studies on in-vehicle navigation systems cannot fully explain user acceptance of mobile navigation applications. To enhance the understanding of the acceptance of mobile navigation applications, this study proposes an extended TAM to explore the factors that may influence drivers to use mobile navigation applications. This model includes three new constructs raised based on the function of navigation wayfinding guidance, the role of navigation transmission media and the process of navigation information processing.

One new construct is sense of direction. Sense of direction has been defined as an awareness of location or orientation (Kozlowski and Bryant, 1977) and it is a verbal expression of people's estimation of their own spatial orientation abilities. A survey showed that participants believe that a good sense of direction is useful for wayfinding by using natural environmental cues (Cornell and Mio, 2003). Wayfinding is the ability to identify one's location and arrive at destinations (or navigate) in the environment, both cognitively and behaviorally. At present, some studies have been performed regarding the effects of sense of direction on wayfinding. For example, Cornell et al. (2003) found that the response latency of wayfinding was predicted by the sense of direction. Padgitt et al. (2012) found that people with a poor self-reported sense of direction made more wayfinding errors than people with a good self-reported sense of direction. In fact, wayfinding requires intricate interactions among multisensory perceptions of environmental and self-motion cues, spatial computations, executive processes, and various types of online and offline spatial representations (Wolbers and Hegarty, 2010). As an awareness of location or orientation, sense of direction can affect people's perceptions on environmental and self-motion cues; thus, it affects wayfinding performance. Although wayfinding is a complicated task, particularly in unfamiliar road environments, the emergence of navigation devices makes wayfinding easy because they can provide people with guidance information. Existing studies have shown that sense of direction affects people's wayfinding, and the effects of navigation products on wayfinding are also obvious. In this case, whether sense of direction affects people's perceptions on navigation products is a curious question. However, existing studies on the acceptance of navigation products have not assessed users’ sense of direction, which causes a failure to identify the effects of sense of direction on the psychological perceptions related to navigation product use. Thus, sense of direction has been added to the original TAM in this study as a new construct to explore the relationships between sense of direction and user perceptions of mobile navigation applications. Another new construct is navigation application affinity. Navigation application affinity assesses the perceived importance of navigation applications and its content to individuals in their lives and is derived from media affinity (Perse,1986; Rubin,1981). Media affinity has been demonstrated to be an important factor that affects media dependency and future use intentions (Rubin and Perse, 1987; Bigne et al., 2007). Navigation applications can also be viewed as a medium because they can transfer road information and traffic information to the driver. Through the above findings on media affinity, it can be preliminarily speculated that navigation application affinity may also affect the driver's intention to use navigation applications. However, the existing studies on navigation products have not involved the navigation application affinity, which leads to a lack of a clear understanding of the relationships between navigation application affinity and the intention to use. Nevertheless, some existing studies involved the affinity of some other media. For example, Aldas-Manzano et al. (2009) considered mobile affinity while exploring the influencing factors of mobile shopping intention, and the results showed that mobile affinity had a direct and positive effect on mobile shopping intention. Another study (Mafé and Blas, 2006) found that there was a positive correlation between internet affinity and internet dependency, and that internet dependency significantly affected users’ intention to shop via the internet. Xu et al. (2018) found that affinity for digital libraries had significant effects on the perceived usefulness and satisfaction of users. These studies showed that the affinity of these media either directly affected behavioral intention or indirectly affected behavioral intention through intermediate factors. Although there were some differences in information content and the transmission process between navigation applications and the internet, mobile and digital libraries, they are all considered media for delivering information, and to some extent, the studies on mobile affinity, internet affinity and digital libraries affinity can provide a reference for research on navigation application affinity. Thus, this study proposed navigation application affinity based on the affinity of some other media and added it to the original TAM as a new construct to systematically explore how navigation application affinity affects drivers’ perceptions, attitudes and usage intentions.

The third new construct is distraction perception, which is defined as the perceived effects of distraction caused by navigation applications on individuals’ vision, hearing, decision-making and behaviors. Navigation products make people's travel more convenient, but they also create some negative effects. A study found that 10–30% of drivers said that they sometimes enter or change a destination while driving (Jamson, 2013). Lansdown (2012) investigated the distractions caused by destination entry and found that the respondents rated their distractions as “medium”. In fact, destination entry is a visual manual task that occupies both the visual and movement resources of drivers. Visual-manual distraction is typically associated with 5–25% of all crashes, and some scholars believe that this number is as high as 80%; obviously, it creates significant increases in risk (Hurts et al., 2011). In addition to the input of navigation information, the receiving of navigation information can also distract drivers. Morris et al. (2015) investigated the glance behaviors of drivers when using navigation systems and found that drivers’ glances at navigation systems account for the majority of the increase in eyes-off-road time. Another study (Hernández et al., 2011) noted that navigation indications decreased the attention paid to road information (such as traffic signs and overhead panels) because of frequent glances at navigation systems. It was reported that a total eyes-off-road time of over 2 s, in particular, significantly increases individual near-crash and crash risks (NHTSA, 2006). The above studies indicate that the use of navigation products significantly distracts drivers, and distraction can easily lead to traffic accidents. Distractions caused by navigation product use have adverse impacts on driving behaviors and safety (Hernandez et al., 2011; Ryu et al., 2013; Morris et al., 2015); however, whether the distraction perception will prevent drivers from using navigation applications remains unknow because existing studies did not assess the relationships between distraction perception and usage intention of mobile navigation applications. To systematically explore the effects of distraction perception on drivers’ perceptions, attitudes and usage intentions, distraction perception was added to the original TAM in this study as a new construct.

The structure of the extended TAM model proposed in this paper is shown in Fig. 5. This paper focuses on exploring the interrelationships among these constructs in the conceptual research model, and identifying the key factors that affect drivers’ acceptance of mobile navigation applications. This study aims to enhance our understanding of mobile navigation application acceptance, which is beneficial for identifying the optimizing directions of mobile navigation application designs and improving the service quality of mobile navigation applications. The hypotheses of this study are as follows:

Fig 5
Download : Download high-res image (296KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. The proposed research model.

H1: Sense of direction has a significant impact on drivers’ acceptance of a navigation application.

H2: Navigation application affinity has a significant impact on drivers’ acceptance of a navigation application.

H3: Distraction perception has a significant impact on drivers’ acceptance of a navigation application.

H4: The relationships between the constructs in the original technology acceptance model remained significant after the three new constructs were added.

2. Methods
2.1. Questionnaire design
According to the literature review and the specific purpose of this research, a self-administered questionnaire was developed to collect the empirical data for this study. The questionnaire was comprised of three sections. The first section collected demographic information, the second section was a mobile navigation application acceptance scale, and the third section was a sense of direction scale.

(1)
Demographic information questionnaire

The demographic information questionnaire included six items: the participants’ sex, age, education level, driving license, driving experience, and mobile navigation application usage experience.

(2)
Mobile navigation application acceptance scale

This scale included 26 items that measured the participants’ perceptions about the usefulness, ease of use, attitude, affinity, and distraction perception and their usage intention of mobile navigation applications. All items were measured with a five-point Likert scale that ranged from “strongly disagree (=1)” to “strongly agree (=5)”. The measurements of perceived usefulness (5 items), perceived ease of use (4 items) and intention to use (3 items) were adapted from Davis (Davis, 1989) and Chen et al. (2011). Navigation application affinity was measured using three items adapted from Stafford et al. (2010) and Walsh et al. (2010). The measure for distraction perception was adapted from Jiang et al. (2017). The measurement of attitude (6 items) was adapted from Davis (1993) and White et al. (2010). All items are shown in Table 1.

(3)
Sense of direction scale


Table 1. Questionnaire items of the mobile navigation application acceptance scale.

Constructs	Items	Descriptions
Navigationapplication affinity	NAA1	I would miss mobile navigation application when driving without it
NAA2	I would feel nervous and confused when driving without a mobile navigation application
NAA3	It is difficult for me to reduce the usage frequency of a mobile navigation application
Distraction perception	DP1	Using a mobile navigation application while driving affects my ability to observe the traffic around me
DP2	Using a mobile navigation application while driving affects my ability to observe traffic signs
DP3	Using a mobile navigation application while driving affects my ability to receive external sound information
DP4	Using a mobile navigation application while driving slows down my reaction down
DP5	Using a mobile navigation application while driving affects my ability to control the vehicle
Perceived ease of use	PEU1	Learning to operate a mobile navigation application is easy for me
PEU2	It is easy to use a mobile navigation application
PEU3	Information provided by a mobile navigation application is very clear and understandable
PEU4	I don't spend lots of time learning how to use a mobile navigation application
Perceived usefulness	PU1	Using a mobile navigation application can save time
PU2	Using a mobile navigation application helps me understand the road conditions around the destination more clearly
PU3	Using a mobile navigation application makes my driving safer
PU4	Using a mobile navigation application makes it easier for me to drive
PU5	Overall, it is useful for me to use a mobile navigation application
Attitude	ATT1	Using a mobile navigation application while driving is beneficial to me
ATT2	Using a mobile navigation application makes my trip more efficient
ATT3	A mobile navigation application can reduce the time spent going the wrong way
ATT4	Using a mobile navigation application makes me drive faster and more steadily
ATT5	The prewarning function of a mobile navigation application makes me more comfortable
ATT6	Mobile navigation application gives me a sense of security instead of nervousness
Intention to use	IU1	I will be willing to use a mobile navigation application in the future
IU2	I will continue to use a mobile navigation application in the future
IU3	I will increase the use of a mobile navigation application in the future
This scale included 15 items that measured the participants’ sense of direction. The sense of direction scale (15 items) was drawn from Hegarty et al. (2002). All items were measured with a seven-point Likert-type scale in which 1 referred to “strongly disagree” and 7 referred to “strongly agree”.

2.2. Questionnaire survey
The questionnaire survey included a pre-survey and a formal survey. The pre-survey questionnaires were distributed at a vehicle maintenance center, and 20 drivers participated in the pre-survey. The participants were informed to mark the items that were difficult to understand and were designed unreasonably. After completion, the investigators communicated with the participants on the problem items and recorded feedback from the participants. When all the pre-survey questionnaires were collected, we revised and improved the questionnaire according to the participants’ feedback. The formal questionnaires were administered through SOJUMP, a professional online questionnaire survey platform in China. Additionally, the survey link was distributed randomly to different WeChat or QQ groups. The questionnaire took each participant approximately 5 min to complete. The first two questions were designed to screen the participants. The first question was “Do you have a driver's license?” and the second was “Have you ever used a mobile navigation application?” The participants who answered “yes” to both questions were told to continue answering the remaining questions, while the other participants were told that they did not meet the requirements. The participants using the same internet protocol address could not complete the survey more than once. A total of 415 responses were collected in a week. Each participant was paid RMB5 as a reward after completing the questionnaire. Samples that were completed considerably quicker than 5 min or that contained incomplete data or extreme data (e.g., all options were the same) were excluded. After filtering, 384 valid samples remained, which accounted for 92.50% of all samples.

2.3. Data analysis
A confirmatory factor analysis was conducted to test the reliability and validity of the questionnaire and the constructs of the developed mobile navigation application acceptance scale. For the indices including χ2/df, the root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA), normed fit index (NFI), comparative fit index (CFI), goodness-of-fit index (GFI) and adjusted goodness of fit index (AGFI) were used to test the model fit. The fitted model was considered to be acceptable when χ2/df was between 1 and 3, the RMSEA was lower than 0.08 and the NFI, CFI, GFI, and AGFI were all higher than 0.90 (Hsu et al., 2012).

Pearson correlation coefficients were calculated to explore the correlation between the drivers’ personal characteristics (including sex, age and driving experience) and the drivers’ sense of direction, navigation application affinity, distraction perception, perceived ease of use, perceived usefulness, attitude and intention to use.

Structural equation modeling (SEM) can test the relationships among multiple constructs and simultaneously handle measurement errors (Shi et al., 2011); thus, this study applied SEM to examine whether the proposed research model could explain the drivers’ acceptance of mobile navigation applications and to determine the effects of sense of direction, navigation application affinity and distraction perception on the drivers’ perceived ease of use, perceived usefulness, attitude and intention to use.

3. Results
3.1. Profile of participants
Table 2 shows the participants’ profiles. In Table 2, frequency represents the number of samples contained in each group. Among the participants, 64.10% were male and 35.90% were female. The participants’ ages ranged from 20 to 71 years, with a mean of 35.71 (SD = 4.4). A total of 30.70% of the participants had a junior or senior high school education or less, and 69.30% of the participants had a university degree or more. The mean driving experience of all participants was 9.13 years (SD = 8.05), and the driving experience ranged from 0.5 to 40 years.


Table 2. Descriptive statistics of the participants’ characteristics (n = 384).

Variable	Category	Frequency	Percent	Mean	Standard Deviation (SD)
Sex	Male	246	64.10%	/	/
Female	138	35.90%	/	/
Age (years)	/	/	/	35.71	10.03
Education level	Junior high school	38	9.90%	/	/
Senior high school	80	20.80%	/	/
University degree	141	36.70%	/	/
Graduate	125	32.60%	/	/
Driving experience (years)	/	/	/	9.13	8.05
3.2. Descriptive statistics of the measured constructs
The results of the descriptive analysis of the measured constructs is shown in Table 3. The minimum values of all constructs ranged from 1.00 to 2.00, while the maximum values ranged between 5.00 and 7.00. The participants’ sense of direction had a mean of 4.30 (SD=0.88), which showed that the participants’ self-rating of sense of direction was in the middle level. The means of the other constructs (except for distraction perception) were higher than 3, which suggests that the participants of the survey generally reported positive evaluations of mobile navigation applications. However, the mean distraction perception was 2.70, which was slightly less than 3 and indicated that overall, the participants thought that mobile navigation applications were less distracting. The standard deviations of all constructs ranged from 0.60 to 0.89, which indicated that the collected data had a high level of consistency.


Table 3. Descriptive statistics of the measured constructs.

Constructs	Min	Max	Mean	Standard Deviation (SD)
Sense of direction	1.80	7.00	4.30	0.88
Navigation application affinity	1.00	5.00	3.44	0.89
Distraction perception	1.00	5.00	2.70	0.86
Perceived ease of use	1.20	5.00	4.13	0.66
Perceived usefulness	1.40	5.00	4.11	0.64
Attitude	1.83	5.00	4.22	0.60
Intention to use	2.00	5.00	4.11	0.66
3.3. Reliability and validity of the scales
The values of the fit indices were χ2/df = 2.185, NFI = 0.929, CFI = 0.960, GFI = 0.901, AGFI = 0.861, and RMSEA = 0.056. Although the AGFI value was slightly lower than the recommended value, the values of the other indices met the requirements; thus, the measurement model indicated a good fit. For internal reliability, the Cronbach's alpha values of all constructs were higher than 0.70, and the correlation coefficients of the item-total were also above 0.70. Zhang (2013) proposed that the Cronbach's alpha values of each construct should be higher than 0.7, and Lei (2017) suggested that the item-total correlation should be higher than 0.4; thus, the items of each construct had sufficient internal reliability. In terms of convergent validity, the factor loadings of all items were higher than 0.7. Previous studies have suggested that all factor loadings must be higher than 0.60 (Hair et al., 2006); thus, the factor loadings of all items met the requirements. The composite reliability values of all constructs were higher than 0.90, and the values of the average variance extracted were higher than 0.6. Generally, the measurement model is considered to have better convergence validity when the composite reliability value is higher than 0.7 or the average variance extracted value is higher than 0.5 (Liu, 2017). Accordingly, the mobile navigation application acceptance scale developed in this study met the test requirements of internal reliability and convergent validity. The details are shown in Table 4. The validity of the sense of direction scale has been tested in other studies (Hegarty et al., 2002); thus, there was no need to conduct validity tests. In this study, the Cronbach's alpha was calculated to assess the reliability of the sense of direction scale. The Cronbach's alpha was 0.817, which is higher than 0.7; thus, the items in the sense of direction scale had great internal consistency.


Table 4. Internal reliability and convergent validity.

Construct	Item	Internal reliability	Convergent validity
Cronbach's alpha	Item-total correlation	Factor loading	Composite reliability	Average variance extracted
Navigation application affinity	NAA1	0.832	0.817	0.827	0.900	0.751
NAA2	0.885	0.873
NAA3	0.896	0.898
Distraction perception	DP1	0.906	0.833	0.831	0.930	0.726
DP2	0.873	0.872
DP3	0.851	0.848
DP4	0.858	0.862
DP5	0.846	0.848
Perceived ease of use	PEU1	0.874	0.883	0.901	0.916	0.697
PEU2	0.883	0.898
PEU3	0.815	0.794
PEU4	0.838	0.826
Perceived usefulness	PU1	0.882	0.838	0.845	0.920	0.733
PU2	0.811	0.816
PU3	0.807	0.785
PU4	0.877	0.880
PU5	0.834	0.844
Attitude	ATT1	0.869	0.811	0.836	0.907	0.620
ATT2	0.807	0.831
ATT3	0.755	0.779
ATT4	0.757	0.723
ATT5	0.763	0.754
ATT6	0.817	0.795
Intention to use	IU1	0.918	0.938	0.940	0.948	0.859
IU2	0.931	0.932
IU3	0.911	0.908
3.4. Correlations between demographic characteristics and measured constructs
The correlations between the demographic characteristics and measured constructs are shown in Table 5. Sex was significantly negatively correlated with sense of direction (r=−0.385, p<0.01), which indicated that compared to males, females had a lower score for sense of direction. The same conclusion was found in a previous study (Sholl et al., 2000). Sex had significant positive correlations with navigation application affinity, attitude and intention to use (r = 0.260, p<0.01; r = 0.110, p<0.05; r = 0.110, p<0.05, respectively). Specifically, females had stronger navigation application affinity, approval attitudes and intention to use, which may be because the female participants in this study reported a lower sense of direction, and they appeared to be more dependent on mobile navigation applications. The age and driving experience were negatively correlated with intention to use mobile navigation applications (r=−0.23, p<0.01; r=−0.20, p<0.01, respectively), which may be because older and experienced drivers were more familiar with local roads. In addition, age and driving experience were also negatively associated with navigation application affinity and attitude (r=−0.22, p<0.01; r=−0.29, p<0.01; r=−0.18, p<0.01; r=−0.19, p<0.01, respectively), which may be caused by the usage intention of these drivers. The weaker usage intention indicated less exposure to mobile navigation applications, and, thus, older and experienced drivers thought that mobile navigation applications were less important, and their attitudes toward mobile navigation applications were not particularly positive. Notably, older drivers thought that mobile navigation applications were not easy to use and were less useful. Existing studies on the use of smartphones showed that the elderly are not very good at using smartphones (Lu, 2018; Chen et al., 2018); a similar relationship may exist among older drivers, and consequently these drivers perceived the ease of use and usefulness of mobile navigation applications to be lower.


Table 5. Correlations between demographic characteristics and measured constructs.

Constructs	Sense of direction	Navigation application affinity	Distraction perception	Perceived ease of use	Perceived usefulness	Attitude	Intention to use
Gender	−0.385⁎⁎	0.26⁎⁎	0.06	−0.01	0.08	0.11*	0.11*
Age	0.095	−0.22⁎⁎	−0.10*	−0.11*	−0.11*	−0.18⁎⁎	−0.23⁎⁎
Driving experience	0.152⁎⁎	−0.29⁎⁎	−0.08	−0.06	−0.06	−0.19⁎⁎	−0.20⁎⁎
⁎
p<0.05

⁎⁎
p<0.01; *** p<0.001

3.5. Hypothesis testing
The proposed hypotheses in the research model were examined through SEM to identify the interrelationships among the different constructs. The values of the fit indices were χ2/df = 2.675, NFI = 0.992, CFI = 0.995, GFI = 0.992, AGFI = 0.945, and RMSEA = 0.066. The values of the fit indices all met the requirements; thus, this model was acceptable. All hypotheses were supported except for H3, and the results are summarized in Fig. 6 and Table 6.

Fig 6
Download : Download high-res image (365KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Results of the hypothesis testing (*p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001).


Table 6. Summary of the hypothesis testing.

Hypotheses	Path	Standardized coefficient	S.E.	C.R.	Results
H1	Sense of direction → Navigation application affinity	−0.261⁎⁎⁎	.050	−5.288	Yes
Sense of direction → Distraction perception	−0.238⁎⁎⁎	.048	−4.794	Yes
Sense of direction → Perceived ease of use	0.179⁎⁎⁎	.037	3.621	Yes
Sense of direction → Perceived usefulness	−0.061*	.019	−2.328	Yes
H2	Navigation application affinity → Perceived ease of use	0.351⁎⁎⁎	.035	7.295	Yes
Navigation application affinity → Perceived usefulness	0.166⁎⁎⁎	.019	6.225	Yes
Navigation application affinity → Attitude	0.276⁎⁎⁎	.027	6.872	Yes
Navigation application affinity → Intention to use	0.322⁎⁎⁎	.028	8.628	Yes
H3	Distraction Perception → Perceived ease of use	−0.211⁎⁎⁎	.037	−4.427	Yes
Distraction Perception → Perceived usefulness	−0.093⁎⁎⁎	.019	−3.645	Yes
Distraction Perception → Attitude	−0.045	.026	−1.199	No
Distraction Perception → Intention to use	−0.074*	.026	−2.201	Yes
H4	Perceived ease of use → Perceived usefulness	0.799⁎⁎⁎	.026	30.031	Yes
Perceived ease of use → Attitude	0.186⁎⁎	.064	2.631	Yes
Perceived usefulness → Attitude	0.386⁎⁎⁎	.070	5.146	Yes
Perceived usefulness → Intention to use	0.298⁎⁎⁎	.046	6.749	Yes
Attitude → Intention to use	0.313⁎⁎⁎	.050	6.930	Yes
⁎
p<0.05.

⁎⁎
p<0.01.

⁎⁎⁎
p<0.001.

The results showed that the drivers’ sense of direction significantly affected their navigation application affinity, distraction perception, perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness (β=−0.261, CR =−5.288, p<0.001; β=−0.238, CR=−4.794, p<0.001; β=0.179, CR =3.621, p<0.001; β=−0.061, CR =−2.328, p<0.05, respectively), i.e., the four paths contained in H1 were all supported. Specifically, drivers with a better sense of direction thought that the navigation applications were less important and they had greater distraction perception. Additionally, navigation applications were considered easier to use but less useful for drivers who had a better sense of direction.

The results showed that drivers’ navigation application affinity significantly affected their perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness (β=0.351, CR=7.295, p<0.001; β=0.119, CR=6.225, p<0.001, respectively); specifically, when the mobile navigation applications were perceived to be more important, they were considered to be easier to use and more useful. The path coefficients indicate that the effect of navigation application affinity on perceived usefulness was weaker than the effect of navigation application affinity on perceived ease of use. The effects of navigation application affinity on attitude and intention to use were also significant (β=0.276, CR=6.872, p<0.001; β=0.322, CR=8.628, p<0.001, respectively). That is, drivers with a stronger navigation application affinity had a more approving attitude toward mobile navigation applications, and their willingness to use navigation applications was stronger. The above results indicated that the four paths contained in H2 were all supported.

The results showed that drivers’ distraction perception had significant negative effects on their perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness (β=−0.211, CR=−4.427, p<0.001; β=−0.093, CR=−3.645, p<0.001, respectively). Specifically, when the drivers’ perceived distraction was more serious, the use of mobile navigation applications was thought to be more difficult, and the mobile navigation applications were perceived to be less useful. Compared with perceived ease of use (H9), the effect of distraction perception on perceived usefulness was weak but still significant (H10). Notably, distraction perception had no significant effects on attitude (β=−0.045, CR=−1.199, p>0.05), but it had a significantly negative effect on the participants’ intention to use (β=−0.074, CR=−2.201, p<0.05), which indicates that distraction perception caused by navigation applications will weaken drivers’ intention to use mobile navigation applications. The above results indicated that the four paths contained in H3 were not entirely supported.

The results showed that the relationships between the constructs in the original technology acceptance model were all significant, i.e., the five paths contained in H4 were all supported. As expected, perceived ease of use significantly affected perceived usefulness (β=0.799, CR =30.031, p<0.001). Both perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness significantly affected attitude (β=0.169, CR =2.631, p<0.01; β=0.363, CR =5.146, p<0.001, respectively). The path coefficients indicate that the effect of perceived usefulness on attitude was stronger than this effect on perceived ease of use. In addition, perceived usefulness and attitude positively and significantly affected drivers’ intention to use (β=0.298, CR =6.749, p<0.001; β=0.313, CR =6.930, p<0.001, respectively), and the coefficient between perceived usefulness and intention to use (β=0.298) was similar to the coefficient between attitude and intention to use (β=0.313).

Regarding the variances of the constructs, navigation application affinity, distraction perception, perceived usefulness and attitude explained 60.50% of the variance in intention to use, whereas navigation application affinity, distraction perception, perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness explained 50.40% of the variance in attitude. In addition, sense of direction, navigation application affinity and distraction perception explained 16.50% of the variance in perceived ease of use, whereas sense of direction, navigation application affinity, distraction perception and perceived ease of use explained 50.40% of the variance in perceived usefulness. A total of 6.6% of the variance in navigation application affinity was explained by sense of direction, whereas 5.40% of the variance in distraction perception was explained by sense of direction.

4. Discussion
According to the function of navigation wayfinding guidance, the role of navigation transmission media and the process of navigation information processing, this study proposed three new constructs concerned with driver traits and their psychological perceptions, namely, sense of direction, navigation application affinity and distraction perception. This study also established an extended TAM to explore the interrelationships among these constructs in the conceptual research model and identified the key factors that affect drivers’ acceptance of mobile navigation applications.

This study found that all causal connections in the original TAM were supported, which is consistent with previous findings on in-vehicle navigation systems, mobile map services or other information systems (Park et al., 2012; Park and del Pobil, 2013; Park and Kim, 2014; Park et al., 2015). In addition to exploring the relationships among the four constructs in the original TAM, this study also revealed the effects of three proposed new constructs (including sense of direction, navigation application affinity and distraction perception) on the four original constructs.

This study found that in addition to attitude and perceived usefulness, navigation affinity and distraction perception had significant effects on the intention to use mobile navigation applications (β=0.322; β=−0.074), and the effect of navigation application affinity was the strongest among the four explanatory variables. The strong effect of drivers’ navigation application affinity on intention to use may be attributed to their dependence on mobile navigation applications. Stafford et al. (Stafford et al., 2010) pointed out that affinity in the field of information technology was similar to dependence in the field of mass media. From this point of view, when the drivers’ affinity for mobile navigation applications is stronger, their dependence on it is greater. Driven by dependence psychology, drivers had a stronger intention to use mobile navigation applications. Although existing studies on navigation system acceptance have not explored the relationships between navigation system affinity and usage intention, a study on mobile shopping acceptance found that users’ affinity for mobile telephones had a significant effect on their mobile shopping intention (Aldás-Manzano et al., 2009). These studies showed that user affinity for an object played an important role in predicting their intention to use it. In addition, this study found that navigation application affinity affected not only the drivers’ intention to use mobile navigation applications but also their perceptions (including ease of use and usefulness) and attitudes. Navigation application affinity enabled drivers to believe that navigation applications can provide reliable guidance information for their travel; thus, drivers who had higher navigation application affinity perceived navigation applications to be more useful (β=0.166). This finding is consistent with another study on users’ satisfaction and loyalty to digital libraries (Xu and Du, 2018). In addition to perceived usefulness, this study found that navigation application affinity can promote drivers’ perception of ease of use (β=0.351), which may be attributed to drivers with a higher navigation application affinity having a stronger dependence on mobile navigation applications. This dependence made drivers more familiar with navigation applications, and, thus, they thought that mobile navigation applications were easier to use. This study also reveals that navigation application affinity is positively correlated with attitude (β=0.276), as expected. Navigation application affinity reflected the perceived importance of mobile navigation applications to drivers, and generally, when the navigation applications were considered to be more important, drivers’ attitudes toward navigation applications were more positive.

Although the path coefficient between distraction perception and intention to use was the lowest (β=−0.074) among these four explanatory variables, the effect of distraction perception on intention to use remained significant. The results indicate that distraction perception caused by navigation applications will weaken drivers’ intention to use mobile navigation applications, potentially because distraction perception will cause negative effects on driving performance and safety (Anttila and Luoma, 2005; Hurts et al., 2011; Metz et al., 2014). These negative effects will degrade drivers’ experiences of navigation applications and make drivers reluctant to use navigation. Similar to navigation application affinity, distraction perception can also significantly affect drivers’ perceptions (including ease of use and usefulness). This study found that drivers who felt that the navigation distraction perception was serious thought that navigation applications were difficult to use (β=−0.211). In fact, if drivers feel that navigation applications more seriously distract them, this indicates that navigation information takes up more cognitive resources, and in this case, less cognitive resources are allocated to other tasks; thus, drivers think that the navigation applications are difficult to use. Another study (Roberts et al., 2012) found that the obtrusiveness of the in-vehicle distraction warning system can hinder the perceived ease of use. The obtrusiveness in that study is similar to the distraction perception in this study, as both constructs measure the interference of in-vehicle information systems on drivers. These two studies showed that interference caused by vehicle information systems will reduce the perceived ease of use of drivers. Furthermore, this study found that greater distraction perception causes drivers to have weaker usefulness perception (β=−0.093), which may occur because navigation applications were intended to improve the efficiency and safety of drivers. However, the use of navigation applications inevitably can distract drivers, which reduces the effectiveness of navigation applications, and, thus, navigation applications were thought to be less useful. In addition, the effect of distraction perception on attitude was negative but not significant (β=−0.045), potentially because perceived usefulness, navigation application affinity and perceived ease of use had a strong ability to explain attitude, which weakened the effect of distraction perception on attitude.

This study explored the effects of an individual attribute (i.e., sense of direction) on four psychological perception factors, and the results showed that sense of direction significantly affected drivers’ navigation application affinity, distraction perception, perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness (β=−0.261; β=−0.238; β=0.179; β=−0.061). Specifically, drivers with a better sense of direction had a stronger navigation application affinity and perceived usefulness. In fact, drivers with a better sense of direction were more likely to reach destinations without mobile navigation applications, i.e., they had lower demands for mobile navigation applications, and thus they thought that mobile navigation applications were less important and less useful. In addition, this study found that sense of direction was negatively correlated with distraction perception and positively correlated with perceived ease of use. Generally, drivers with a better sense of direction had a strong spatial orientation ability, and this ability was favorable for drivers to extract and comprehend the spatial position information provided by navigation applications. This ability allowed navigation information processing to occupy less cognitive resources, and these drivers perceived less distraction from navigation applications; they also believed that mobile navigation applications were easier to use.

Of the individual characteristic variables evaluated in this study, only sense of direction was incorporated into the proposed model; and sex, age and driving experience were not included, because there was collinearity between sense of direction and sex, age and driving experience. When these variables were incorporated in the model simultaneously, the strong effects of sense of direction on drivers’ navigation application affinity, distraction perception, perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness made the effects of the other individual characteristic variables insignificant. Thus, sex, age and driving experience were not incorporated in the model.

Although this study explored the interrelationships among sense of direction, navigation application affinity, distraction perception, perceived ease of use, perceived usefulness, attitude and intention to use mobile navigation applications, there were still shortcomings in this method. This study adopted the questionnaire method to collect empirical data, although some measures were taken to avoid the effects of subjective tendency and a reaction set of participants when designing the questionnaire, for example, by avoiding items with tendentiousness. However, the disadvantage of the subjective test method in that it is susceptible to individual characteristics cannot be completely avoided. In a future study, we will collect objective driving performance data through driving simulation tests and field tests, and we will combine objective data with subjective data to explore drivers’ perceptions, decision-making and behavioral responses to navigation information with different characteristics (such as broadcast timings, broadcast wordings, display size and display information layout), to further construct the driver's cognitive graph guided by different navigation information. In addition, the distraction perception and usage intention of this study were determined as the driver's overall evaluation based on all their journeys while in fact the characteristics of distraction perception and usage behaviors at different points in a journey may differ. Thus, in a future study, we will focus on studying drivers’ distraction perception and usage behaviors at different stages in a journey based on the data of objective performance and subjective feelings, and we will further explore their effects on the overall acceptance of mobile navigation applications. Park and Kim (2014) once pointed out that the use pattern of car navigation systems can vary between regions. In this study, the participants were all Chinese, and their mobile navigation application usage experience, characteristics of road traffic and design of mobile navigation applications in China were more or less different from those in other countries, which will affect drivers’ perceptions, attitudes and intention to use. Thus, whether the findings of this study are applicable to drivers’ acceptance of mobile navigation applications in other regions of the world requires further verification. However, three new constructs proposed in this study can provide a reference for studying the mobile navigation application acceptance of other drivers with different cultural backgrounds. In a future study, if conditions permit, we will explore drivers’ acceptance of mobile navigation applications in other countries and further compare the differences of drivers’ acceptance in different countries.

5. Conclusions
Recently, mobile navigation applications have become increasingly popular; however, existing studies on navigation products pay little attention to drivers’ acceptance of mobile navigation applications, resulting in a lack of clear understanding of the factors affecting drivers’ intention to use navigation applications. To make up for the shortcomings of existing research, this study proposed an extend TAM considering drivers’ sense of direction, navigation application affinity and distraction perception, and further verified the feasibility of the proposed model. First, a questionnaire designed to measure drivers’ demographics, sense of direction and acceptance of mobile navigation applications was developed and administered. Second, a confirmatory factor analysis was conducted to examine the reliability and validity of the developed mobile navigation application acceptance scale, and an exploratory factor analysis was conducted to examine the reliability of the sense of direction scale. Third, an SEM of navigation application acceptance was constructed to explore the interrelationships among these constructs in the conceptual research model and to further identify the key factors affecting drivers’ acceptance of mobile navigation applications. The main conclusions were as follows:

(1)
The extended TAM model proposed in this study can sufficiently explain drivers’ acceptance of mobile navigation applications, which explained 60.50% of the variance in the intention to use mobile navigation applications.

(2)
In addition to perceived usefulness and attitude, navigation application affinity and distraction perception also significantly affected drivers’ intention to use mobile navigation applications, and navigation application affinity played impellent role whereas distraction perception played suppressive role.

(3)
Navigation application affinity and distraction perception not only affected drivers’ intention to use mobile navigation applications but also significantly affected their perceptions (including ease of use and usefulness) on mobile navigation applications.

(4)
Sense of direction was a significant individual trait affecting drivers’ navigation application affinity, distraction perception, perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness.

A major contribution was the exploration of the effects of drivers’ sense of direction, navigation application affinity and distraction perception on their perceptions (ease of use and usefulness), attitudes and intention to use. These results revealed the interrelationships of the three new proposed constructs and the four original constructs, thus enhancing our understanding on the factors affecting driver’ intention to use mobile navigation applications. In addition, the three new constructs proposed in this study provided a reference for studying the mobile navigation application acceptance of other drivers with different cultural backgrounds. The findings of this study have some important practical implications for the improvement of mobile navigation applications. This study found that navigation application affinity was an important factor that affected drivers’ perceptions (including ease of use and usefulness), attitude and their intention to use mobile navigation applications. Navigation application affinity reflected drivers’ perceived importance of mobile navigation applications; thus, some measures should be taken to improve drivers’ perceptions of navigation application importance. Whether drivers think navigation applications are important depends on their roles played in the driver's travels; the accuracy and reliability of navigation information are key elements affecting their roles. Thus, relevant developers should continually optimize incorrect and inappropriate navigation information according to drivers’ feedback data to make navigation applications provide better service for drivers and improve the navigation usage experience of drivers to further enhance their perception of the importance of mobile navigation applications. In addition, this study revealed the effects of distraction perception on two other types of perceptions (including ease of use and usefulness) and intention to use. These results implied that distraction perception caused by navigation applications cannot be ignored. However, a person's cognitive ability is limited, and it is easy to distract drivers if the navigation information is too complicated. Therefore, the amount of navigation information presented to drivers should be within their information processing capacity, and the contents of navigation information should be readily comprehensible to drivers to further reduce distraction perception caused by navigation applications and enhance drivers’ intention to use mobile navigation applications. This study found that sense of direction had significant effects on drivers’ perceptions, including importance, distraction, ease of use and usefulness. Therefore, the prompt form of navigation information (such as the layout of visual information and the style of voice information) should satisfy the demands and expectations of drivers with different senses of direction. In addition, when evaluating navigation applications, drivers with different senses of direction should be selected as participants to ensure that the assessment is objective and unbiased. The above recommendations related to navigation application affinity, distraction perception and sense of direction provide a reference for the optimization of the prompt contents and forms of mobile navigation applications.

