Password reuse is widespread, so a breach of one provider’s password database threatens accounts on other providers. When companies find stolen credentials on the black market and notice potential
password reuse, they may require a password reset and send affected users a notification. Through two user studies, we provide
insight into such notifications. In Study 1, 180 respondents saw
one of six representative notifications used by companies in situations potentially involving password reuse. Respondents answered
questions about their reactions and understanding of the situation.
Notifications differed in the concern they elicited and intended
actions they inspired. Concerningly, less than a third of respondents reported intentions to change any passwords. In Study 2, 588
respondents saw one of 15 variations on a model notification synthesizing results from Study 1. While the variations’ impact differed
in small ways, respondents’ intended actions across all notifications
would leave them vulnerable to future password-reuse attacks. We
discuss best practices for password-reuse notifications and how
notifications alone appear insufficient in solving password reuse.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Security and privacy → Usability in security and privacy;
KEYWORDS
Notifications; Password Reuse; Data Breaches; Usable Security
1 INTRODUCTION
People reuse passwords [10, 16, 20, 32, 44, 46, 65]. An average user
may have hundreds of different online accounts [16, 44, 65], and
passwords are unlikely to be completely replaced anytime soon [4].
As password managers [13, 37] and single sign-on systems [3, 55]
have low adoption, password reuse is a common coping strategy.
Password reuse has major ramifications for the security of online
accounts. A breach of one account provider’s password database
puts at risk accounts on other services where login credentials are
the same as, or even just similar to [63], the breached accounts.
Attackers that target large leaks of passwords stored using computationally expensive hash functions (e. g., scrypt) exploit this
password reuse in offline guessing [22]. Attackers try to match identifiers like usernames and email addresses to previously cracked
credentials. They then transform the already known passwords to
increase their likelihood of correctly guessing passwords [9, 26, 62].
Unfortunately, password breaches are common. The website
haveibeenpwned.com counts billions of compromised account credentials due to data breaches, including from high-profile services
like Yahoo!, LinkedIn, MySpace, and Dropbox [31, 45]. Thomas et al.
estimated that 7–25 % of passwords traded on black-market forums
match high-value targets like Google accounts [57].
Account providers send a variety of notifications about situations potentially caused by password reuse. We refer to all such
notifications as password-reuse notifications, regardless of whether
password reuse is explicitly mentioned. To protect their users, some
providers proactively monitor black-market sources for passwords
stolen from other sites, searching for matches in their own password
database [39]. Once aware of such situations, these providers send
notifications to affected users, encouraging them to change their
password. Password-reuse notifications also include notifications
about suspicious login attempts, which may have been triggered
by a password-reuse attack, or notifications requiring a password
reset after a data breach. In a recent example, Twitter asked users
to change not only their Twitter passwords, but also passwords on
services where they had reused their Twitter password [1].
Surprisingly little is known about how users interpret or respond to password-reuse notifications, and how the design of such
notifications impacts users’ understanding and risk perception.
Session 8B: Usable Passwords CCS’18, October 15-19, 2018, Toronto, ON, Canada 1549
Current password-reuse notifications vary widely, and despite the
frequency with which such notifications are sent, no best practices
have been outlined. This paucity of knowledge contrasts with the
large and rich literature investigating the design of warnings and
notifications about other security-critical tasks, including detecting
phishing [11, 53], TLS-protected browsing [2, 15], malware [6, 7],
and two-factor authentication (2FA) [48]. Many studies have aimed
to help users make better passwords [12, 40, 59] or measured the
prevalence of password reuse [10, 32, 46, 57]. This paper is the first
to explore how to inform users about situations caused by password
reuse and help them recover from the resultant consequences.
Password-reuse notifications face the herculean task of helping users understand and respond to a convoluted situation. Users
have posted on Twitter about their confusion about receiving such
notifications. For example, one tweet about a notification asked,
“What was another site doing with my Facebook password in the
first place?” This may be because understanding the risks of password reuse requires knowledge of how attackers leverage password
breaches to compromise accounts on other services. Password-reuse
notifications must address this underlying complexity to convince
users to replace reused passwords across all sites with a new, unique
password for each account. We explain the complexity of these issues from the perspective of a fictitious company, AcmeCo, which
we adopt for the remainder of this paper.
We conducted two complementary user studies about passwordreuse notifications. First, we sought to understand how users understand and perceive existing notifications. We collected 24 notifications sent by real companies in situations that may have been
caused by password reuse. We chose six notifications whose characteristics were representative of the full 24. In Study 1, we conducted
a scenario-based online survey in which 180 Mechanical Turk workers saw one of these six notifications (Sec. 3). We asked respondents
why they might have received such a notification, the feelings the
notification elicits, and what actions they might take in response.
Respondents reported they would be alarmed and confused, and
that they would intend to take action in response to receiving these
notifications (Sec. 4). Some notifications were more effective than
others at encouraging a response. Ultimately, though, participants’
responses misattributed the potential root cause of receiving these
(real, previously deployed) notifications. Only 20.6 % mentioned
the breach of another company’s password database as a potential
cause, and only 18.8 % mentioned password reuse as a factor.
Based on respondents’ perceptions and responses (Sec. 5), we
identified five design goals for password-reuse notifications that
integrated characteristics of notifications that were effective in
Study 1 and improved upon characteristics that were less effective.
We then conducted a follow-up study to analyze a model notification we believed achieved all five design goals (Sec. 6). This
notification explicitly describes password reuse and the breach of
another provider as the cause of the notification. Additionally, it
forces a password reset, encourages other beneficial security actions, and is delivered through multiple mediums. Study 2 was again
a scenario-based survey in which 588 Mechanical Turk workers
saw one of 15 variants of this model notification.
While Study 2 respondents perceived our model notification as
official and urgent, they nonetheless misattributed the root cause
of the notification (Sec. 7). Many respondents did not perceive password reuse as a potential cause of the situation. Additionally, although nearly all respondents stated intentions to change one or
more passwords, most reported plans to create these “new” passwords by reusing other passwords of theirs, leaving them vulnerable
to similar attacks in the future. From our collected results, we establish best practices for maximizing the effectiveness of passwordreuse notifications. However, because password-reuse notifications
may not be sufficient on their own, we conclude with a discussion of
additional steps for holistically addressing password reuse (Sec. 9).
2 BACKGROUND
We summarize prior work on password reuse and warning design.
2.1 Passwords and Password Reuse
Passwords are the dominant method of user authentication for online accounts due to their low cost, immediacy, convenience, and deployability [4, 27]. Although online account providers employ methods beyond passwords to improve security, such as 2FA [8, 24] and
risk-based authentication [19, 23, 41], solutions such as password
managers face steep adoption barriers [13]. Accounts therefore
remain vulnerable to a number of password-related attacks [61].
Password reuse amplifies the severity of all password attacks.
Once login credentials are compromised, all accounts with those
same credentials become vulnerable. Various studies over the years
have found that users reuse a majority of their passwords across
sites [10]. Users have dozens of accounts, but only a few passwords
that they cycle through [14, 16, 44, 54, 65]. Users reuse passwords
to minimize the burden of memorization [17, 20], and they do so
especially often for accounts they consider lower value [20, 54].
Even if users do not reuse passwords verbatim, they often modify
existing passwords when creating new ones [34, 44, 52].
We consider password breaches to be cases where a hacker illegally obtains login credentials from a vulnerable system [30]. Once
an account is breached, any other accounts sharing the same credentials become vulnerable [26]. Breaches are frequent, with over 4.5
billion credentials reported stolen in 2016 [30]. Leveraging stolen
credentials enables attackers to perform online guessing with some
success. Thomas et al. accumulated over 1.79 billion non-unique
usernames and passwords from credential leaks, finding that 7–25 %
of those credentials would enable attackers to log into a compromised account holder’s Google account [57]. Credential-stuffing,
which automates logging into as many sites as possible with the
stolen login credentials, generates more than 90 % of login traffic
on many of the world’s largest websites and mobile apps [51]. Once
accounts have been compromised, attackers may use them for spam,
financial data, or distributing malware [43, 56].
2.2 Security Warnings and Notifications
A large body of prior work has researched security warnings and
notifications broadly. Some examples include encouraging users to
adopt 2FA [48] and detecting phishing [11, 53]. In their study of 25
million Google Chrome and Firefox users, Akhawe et al. found that
user experience has a significant impact on behavior and that users
often do look at warnings [2], contrary to other findings that users
are susceptible to habituation and often ignore web warnings [5, 6].
Session 8B: Usable Passwords CCS’18, October 15-19, 2018, Toronto, ON, Canada 1550
Despite extensive prior work measuring password reuse, very
few studies have examined password-reuse notifications. Jenkins et
al. evaluated the efficacy of just-in-time fear appeals in warnings —
“persuasive messages intended to better help someone be aware of
a threat and to persuade them to engage in protective action” — at
preventing users from reusing passwords, finding that such appeals
resulted in a significant decrease in password reuse [33]. This suggests that notifications could encourage better password creation
and management strategies. There is a need, however, to isolate
what is effective or ineffective about these notifications. While Zou
et al. studied reactions to notifications of the Equifax data breach,
their work did not examine password reuse [66]. Huh et al. studied
the notification LinkedIn sent users after their password database
was breached, finding that less than half of participants changed
their LinkedIn password upon receiving this notification [29]. While
they asked respondents to self-report their actual reactions to receiving a single notification in the wild, we comparatively evaluate
many different notifications, isolating the factors that contribute to
particular reactions and understanding. Furthermore, while Huh
et al. studied a notification that LinkedIn sent their users encouraging them to change their LinkedIn passwords due to a breach
of LinkedIn, we focus on cases where cross-site password reuse
substantially complicates the situation. To our knowledge, prior
work has neither focused on notifications about cross-site password
reuse nor compared such notifications.
3 STUDY 1
Study 1 explored current password-reuse notifications. It investigated user perceptions of, and reactions to, such notifications. Both
Study 1 and Study 2 were approved by our IRB.
As both Study 1 and Study 2 rely on respondents’ self-reports of
their feelings and actions they would intend to take, percentages
reported below should not be taken as ground truth. Rather, we use
our survey findings to inform the design of improved passwordreuse notifications. While observing notification response in the
wild may produce more accurate absolute reports of behavioral
response, such observational studies fail to allow us to understand
why people may react in certain ways and improve those reactions.
Thus, similar to prior work on SSL warnings [15], we use Study 1 to
identify potential areas of improvement for current password-reuse
notifications, developing a model notice that we evaluate in Study 2.
3.1 Recruitment and Survey Structure
We recruited participants on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, requiring
that workers be 18 years or older, live in the US, and have a 95 %+
approval rate. We advertised our study as a survey about “online
account notifications.” To avoid recruitment biases, we did not
mention security or privacy. Study 1 was a scenario-based survey
expected to take 15 minutes. Respondents were compensated $2.50.
Respondents were first introduced to the survey scenario: “In
the following survey, you will be asked to imagine that your name
is Jo Doe. You have an online account with a major company called
AcmeCo and can access your account through both a website and
a mobile application. Imagine that this account is important to you
and that it is like other accounts you may have, such as for email,
Table 1: Prominent characteristics of the six Study 1 notifications. The name of the condition identifies the provider
that currently uses that text.
Netflix
LinkedIn
Instagram
Google red bar
Google email
Facebook
Explicitly Mentioned
Password reuse ✓ ✓
Outside breach ✓ ✓
Outside security incident ✓ ✓
Suspicious activity ✓ ✓ ✓
Review activity ✓ ✓
Forced password reset ✓ ✓ ✓
Recommended password reset ✓
Delivery Method
Browser ✓ ✓
Email ✓ ✓ ✓
Mobile ✓
banking, or social media.” Then, respondents were presented with
one of six password-reuse notifications (Section 3.2).
Three sets of questions followed. The first set measured respondents’ overall understanding of the notification by asking what may
have caused it to be sent through two open-ended questions: “In
your own words, please describe what this notification is telling
you” and “In your own words, please describe all factors that may
have caused you to receive this notification.” The second set asked
respondents to list three feelings they might have and three actions they might take upon receiving the notification, and why. The
third set presented seven statements, in randomized order, about
perceptions of the effectiveness of the notification’s explanation
of the situation, its delivery method, and its apparent legitimacy.
Respondents gave a Likert-scale response and free-text justification
for each. Finally, respondents reported the following demographic
information: gender, age, highest degree attained, and technical
expertise. Appendix A.1 contains the full text of the survey.
3.2 Conditions
In Study 1 we evaluated six real notifications used by online account
providers. To collect such notifications, four members of the research team searched for notifications sent by major online account
providers after known data breaches that had been posted online or
on social media. We deemed a notification in scope if the potential
risk may have originated from password reuse. We verified all notifications as legitimate (not phishing) by cross-referencing Twitter
accounts, company security blogs, and news articles.
We collected 24 real notifications about password reuse. To select a set of representative notifications, we used affinity diagramming [28] to categorize and group similar notifications. Three members of the research team created separate affinity diagrams for
major types of variation in notifications. We uncovered stark differences in the degree to which a cause was explained, what actions
were required or suggested, and how the notification was delivered.
From the 24 notifications, we selected six that captured the range
of variation within and across these three dimensions. Table 1 summarizes the notifications, which we refer to with the name of the
provider who originally sent that notification. To avoid priming
Session 8B: Usable Passwords CCS’18, October 15-19, 2018, Toronto, ON, Canada 1551
Figure 1: A notification we tested, rebranded from LinkedIn.
respondents with biases they might have about the companies that
originally sent these notifications, as well as to minimize potential
confounds from the visual layout of the notification, we visually
rebranded all notifications to be from a hypothetical online account provider “AcmeCo.” Figure 1 depicts the rebranded LinkedIn
notification. The five other notifications are in Appendix B.1.
Prior to launching the study, we conducted cognitive interviews
to refine the survey wording iteratively and verify the intelligibility
of questions. A limitation of survey studies is that responses can
suffer from self-report and social desirability biases that may affect
accuracy. Respondents’ reported reactions may differ from their
reactions had they received the notification in real life. In line
with survey best practices, we worked to minimize relevant biases
through the aforementioned pre-testing and by using softening
language to minimize social-desirability bias [36]. Despite potential
biases, related work has shown that while survey responses to
security messages may be biased, they correlate strongly with realworld reactions [50]. Our results should thus be interpreted as
trends of user behavior rather than precise frequency estimates.
3.3 Analysis Methods and Metrics
We collected both quantitative and qualitative data. Our quantitative analysis centered on the seven statements to which participants
responded on scales (four on Likert scales and three on other scales),
which we treated as ordinal. To evaluate whether responses differed
significantly across notifications while controlling for the effects of
demographic factors, we built ordinal logistic regression models.
In each model, the dependent variable was the set of Likert-scale
responses to a given statement. We used the following independent
variables: the notification the respondent saw; the respondent’s age;
the respondent’s gender; the respondent’s level of education; and
the respondent’s technical background. All independent variables
were treated as categorical; we selected the most prevalent categorical value as the baseline. We chose the LinkedIn notification
as the baseline category for the notification term as it was most
representative (as determined through affinity diagramming) of the
24 messages we originally collected.
In particular, we built parsimonious regression models using
stepwise backward-elimination, minimizing AIC. All of these parsimonious final models contained the notification term. To determine
whether this notification term was significant, we compared these
final models to their analogous null models (removing the notification term) to calculate an omnibus p-value, which we report as the
regression p-value. Furthermore, we report significant individual
factors in the regression by providing that factor’s log-adjusted
regression coefficient (e.g., odds ratio, denoted OR) and p-value.
Our accompanying technical report1
contains the full regression
tables. If this omnibus test was significant, we performed pairwise
comparisons between notifications using the Mann-Whitney U
test, for which we report the test statistic (U ) and the p-value. We
set α = .05 for all tests and used the Holm method to correct for
multiple testing within a family of tests.
Finally, we analyzed responses to open-answer survey questions
via qualitative coding. A member of the research team read the
responses and performed a thematic analysis, iteratively updating
the codebook as necessary. The researcher then used axial coding
for consolidation and clarification, resulting in 11 themes for the
causes of receiving the presented notification. To focus on recurring
themes, we report codes that occurred for at least 10 % of responses.
We also performed a thematic analysis of respondents’ free-text
explanations in the third set of questions to more fully understand
why respondents answered the questions the way they did. This
process was largely the same as the one for the first section of
questions, resulting in four or more codes for each question.
In addition, respondents provided in free text three feelings and
three intended actions in response to the notification. We cleaned
responses to condense tenses differences and misspellings. As the
survey asked for these in any order, responses were not ranked
during analysis. We used the NRC Word-Emotion Association Lexicon [42] to group feelings as positive, neutral, or negative.
4 STUDY 1 RESULTS
In Study 1, we found that the current password-reuse notifications
we tested elicit worry and fear. While the notifications do motivate
some respondents to report intending to change their passwords,
respondents do not report intending to change their passwords
in sufficiently security-enhancing ways. For example, many respondents report planning to make small adjustments to existing
passwords, which will likely leave them susceptible to passwordreuse attacks. This lack of sufficient action may be attributed in
part to notification confusion. A majority of respondents report
not understanding the notification, and their mental model may,
therefore, be insufficient to elicit an appropriate response.
4.1 Respondents
180 people responded to our survey. Their ages ranged from 18 to
74 years, though most respondents were between 25 and 34 years
1https://super.cs.uchicago.edu/papers/ccs18-tr.pdf
Session 8B: Usable Passwords CCS’18, October 15-19, 2018, Toronto, ON, Canada 1552
curiosity
relieved
upset
frustrated
irritating
suspicious
safe
surprised
angry
confusion
nervous
concerned
annoyance
anxious
afraid
worried
0% 5% 10%
Proportion of Responses
Feelings
negative neutral positive
Figure 2: Sentiment analysis (using NRC EmoLex [42]) of respondents’ reported feelings upon receiving a notification.
old. 44.4 % of our respondents were female, and a majority (62.8 %) of
respondents had a two-year or higher degree. 70.6 % of respondents
reported no experience (education or job) in a technical field.
4.2 Notification Response
Figure 3 highlights respondents’ reactions to the notifications.
Notifications elicited negative responses. Of the 540 feelings
reported by respondents, worried, afraid, and anxious were the main
responses to receiving a password-reuse notification. Figure 2 displays feelings reported by ten or more respondents. Fortunately,
some positive feelings, such as safe or relieved, were also common.
As the notifications are communicating potential risks to accounts,
it makes sense that an overall negative sentiment dominated. However, a password-reuse notification should induce more positive
responses, as they are ultimately helping their users.
Notifications were concerning. Across notifications, most respondents (66.7 %) reported that they would feel extremely or moderately concerned upon receiving the notification. R56 explained,
“The potential for losing an account and sensitive information is
something to be concerned about. Anyone who wouldn’t feel concerned is either ignorant or lying.” Only 3.3 % reported no concern.
Respondents’ reported concern differed significantly across notifications (regression p = 0.003). Respondents found the Facebook
(OR = 3.3, p = 0.011) and the Google email notifications (OR = 4.1,
p = 0.003) more concerning than the LinkedIn notification, the control in our regression. Respondents also reported a greater concern
about receiving the Facebook notification (U = 674.5, p = 0.019)
and the Google email notification (U = 730.5, p = 0.011) than the
Instagram notification. 89.7 % reported the Facebook notification as
concerning, 83.9 % reported the Google email notification as concerning, 54.9 % reported the LinkedIn notification as concerning,
and 53.1 % reported the Instagram notification as concerning.
Ignoring the notifications would have consequences. Most
respondents disagreed or strongly disagreed that ignoring the
notification they received would not have consequences (77.1 %).
Responses differed significantly across notifications (regression
p = .045). Respondents noted potential consequences that included
harm to their account “because hackers could steal my info” (R150),
as well as “being locked out of my accounts” (R84). However, a
sizable minority was unsure (16.7 %). These “unsure” respondents
wanted to get more information from AcmeCo, which shows the
importance of clear communication of the situation at hand in a
password-reuse notification. Finally, a few respondents were dismissive of any consequences: “Acme has so many accounts that the
chances that my account is hacked are pretty slim” (R81).
Facebook, Google email notifications high-priority.Across
notifications, responses about the priority of taking action differed
significantly (regression p = .012). Compared to the LinkedIn notification, a significantly larger fraction of respondents reported that
taking action in response to the Facebook (OR = 4.3, p = 0.003)
and Google email (OR = 3.0, p = 0.022) notifications would be a
high priority. Significantly more respondents reported the same
for the Facebook notification relative to the Instagram notification
(U = 633.0, p = 0.044). 100 % of respondents who received the
Facebook notification, 93.5 % of those who received the Google
email notification, 80.6 % of those who received the LinkedIn notification, and 71.0 % of those who received the Instagram notification
reported that taking action in response to their respective notifications would be a high priority. We hypothesize respondents
perceived the Facebook and Google email notifications to a be
higher priority because the Facebook notification prohibited users
from logging in, and Google’s email included a prominent red color.
Nearly all respondents indicated that taking action in response to the notification was a priority. Across all notifications, 95.6 % of respondents indicated that taking action in response
to receiving the notification would be either a very high, high, or
a medium priority. In their free-response justifications, 76.6 % of
respondents explained that they wanted to protect their personal
information or prevent unauthorized account access. 29.4 % of responses specified that the high priority was due to a lack of time:
“The quicker I act, the safer my account will be” (R54).
4.3 Understanding of the Notification
Few respondents recognized the notification’s real cause. We
asked respondents to describe all factors that may have caused them
to receive that notification. Most respondents believed that the
notification was sent because of circumstances beyond their control.
R171 was typical in failing to account for password-reuse attacks
as a cause, stating, “The chances of someone guessing that I use the
same password are still incredibly low. Still, I would be worried that
the password might be too common.” 60 % of respondents attributed
the notification to someone hacking their account or unsuccessfully
attempting to log in. While this makes sense, as some notifications
convey that someone may have tried to log in to their account, this
is not the full truth: the login may have been attempted as part of a
password-reuse attack. Further, 21.1% of respondents believed that
it may have been sent in error, as a false alarm due to the real user
of the account using a new device, signing in from a new location,
or entering the incorrect password too many times. A minority
mentioned the potential real cause of the notification: either a data
breach (20.6 %) or password reuse by the account holder (18.8 %).
4.4 Intended Response to Notification
Most respondents do not intend to change their password.
While most respondents agreed that taking action was a priority,
Session 8B: Usable Passwords CCS’18, October 15-19, 2018, Toronto, ON, Canada 1553
Facebook
Google email
Google red bar
Instagram
LinkedIn
Netflix
Action
Percentage
0 20 40 60 80 100
Facebook
Google email
Google red bar
Instagram
LinkedIn
Netflix
Method
Percentage
0 20 40 60 80 100
Facebook
Google email
Google red bar
Instagram
LinkedIn
Netflix
Consequence
Percentage
0 20 40 60 80 100
Facebook
Google email
Google red bar
Instagram
LinkedIn
Netflix
Real
Percentage
0 20 40 60 80 100
Facebook
Google email
Google red bar
Instagram
LinkedIn
Netflix
Resolve
Percentage
0 20 40 60 80 100
Facebook
Google email
Google red bar
Instagram
LinkedIn
Netflix
Concern
Percentage
0 20 40 60 80 100
Facebook
Google email
Google red bar
Instagram
LinkedIn
Netflix
Before
Percentage
0 20 40 60 80 100 Very high priority Not at all a priority
Medium priority
Strongly disagree Strongly agree
Neither
Extremely concerned Not at all concerned
Somewhat concerned
Many times Never
A few times
Figure 3: Respondents reported their priority of taking action in response to the notification. Respondents also reported their
agreement of whether the notification was sent via the appropriate method, could be ignored without consequence, would be
sent by real companies, and explained how to resolve the situation. Finally, respondents reported the level of concern they
would expect to have upon receiving the notification, and whether they had received such notifications before.
they disagreed on what to do and volunteered a wide variety of
examples. Respondents wrote that they would take actions such as
changing their password (29.3 % of respondents), investigating the
situation (18.6 %), and logging into their account (15.4 %) in response
to receiving the notification. While the self-reported intention to
change their password was the most common, it is nevertheless
extremely low as an absolute percentage. This is a cause for concern,
as securing an account through password changes should be a
priority for all users in situations of password reuse.
Overall, respondents found the notifications informative.
A majority of respondents (62.8 %) either agreed or strongly agreed
that the notification they received explained how to resolve the
situation by giving specific, clear instructions (58.3 %). However,
26.7 % believed it did not do so, and 10.0 % of respondents indicated
that resolving the situation would require more background information. As R137 explained, “I need more information as to what
happened before I just blindly change my password.”
Notifications with prominent explanations perceived as
most informative. We observed significant differences across notifications in respondents’ perceptions of whether the notification
explained how to resolve the situation (regression p < 0.001). The
agreement that the notification explained the situation differed
starkly across notifications: LinkedIn (80.6 % of respondents agreed
or strongly agreed), Facebook (75.9 %), Netflix (75.0 %), Instagram
(68.7 %), Google email (54.9 %), and Google red bar (21.6 %). Agreement was higher for the LinkedIn notification than for the Google
email (OR = 0.2, p < 0.001) and the Google red bar (OR = .03,
p < 0.001) notifications. Compared to the Google red bar notification, agreement was also significantly higher for the Facebook
(U = 646.5, p < 0.001), Google email (U = 642, p = 0.011), Instagram (U = 177.5, p < 0.001), and Netflix (U = 131.0, p < 0.001)
notifications. The low reported percentages for the Google email
and Google red bar notifications make sense because both notifications had a link that had to be clicked for more information and
explanation. The other notifications had more detail and instructions in the notification itself.
4.5 Reactions to Structure and Delivery
Most respondents agreed that the notification they received used the
appropriate method of contacting them (65.0 %), primarily because
it was easy, convenient, or fast (58.3 % of respondents). However,
some respondents would have preferred a more immediate method
(17.8 %) or multiple methods (11.6 %). Agreement about the method’s
appropriateness differed across notifications (regression p < .001).
Email perceived as the most legitimate delivery method.
The Google email, LinkedIn, and Netflix notifications, all sent by
email, were reported to be delivered with the most appropriate
method and to seem the most legitimate. This is perhaps due to
some respondents’ justification that email is official (10 %), and that
they may have seen similar email notifications in the past. Respondents were more likely to report that the LinkedIn notification was
appropriate than the Facebook (OR = 0.2, p < 0.001), Google red
bar (OR = 0.1, p < 0.001), and Instagram (OR = 0.3, p < 0.010) notifications. For the LinkedIn, Instagram, Facebook, and Google red
bar notifications, respectively, 98.6 %, 62.5 %, 51.7 %, and 48.2 % of
respondents reported agreement that the notification they received
was delivered with the appropriate method. Fewer respondents
found the Facebook notification appropriate than the Google email
notification (U = 265, p = 0.049).
Respondents’ expectations regarding real companies sending the
notification also differed across conditions (regression p = .012).
While 96.7 % of respondents who saw the LinkedIn notification reported expecting real companies would send it, only 67.7 % reported
the same for the Instagram notification (OR = 0.2, p = 0.003).
Our notifications were relevant to real situations. Overall,
most respondents agreed (86.7 %) that they would expect real companies to send notifications like these when necessary. Respondents
reported receiving notifications similar to this one in the past: 52.1 %
of respondents indicated receiving a similar notification a few times,
and 9.5 % many times. Those who had received similar notifications
explained that they were from sign-ins on other devices (20.0 %) or
financial services (13.3 %).
Session 8B: Usable Passwords CCS’18, October 15-19, 2018, Toronto, ON, Canada 1554
Figure 4: Our model notification with the parts that varied
highlighted in color and further specified in Table 2.
5 PASSWORD-REUSE NOTIFICATION GOALS
Password-reuse notifications take on a challenging task as the situation at hand is the cumulative result of multiple parties’ actions.
Further, the level of risk to convey and the appropriate actions
to suggest or require are not always clear. While research has investigated best practices for other types of security notifications
(cf. Section 2), we sought to create a framework for evaluating
password-reuse notifications. Drawing on the Study 1 results, we
identified five goals that effective notifications should achieve sufficiently: timeliness, legitimacy, action, background, and trust. We
used these goals as a framework to evaluate notifications in Study 2.
First, notifications should reach their intended audience in a
timely manner. A notification about a compromised password is
only useful if the user sees the notification to create a new one.
Second, notifications should be perceived as legitimate. Some
respondents in Study 1 were hesitant to trust our notifications,
believing that they might be phishing. The presence of hyperlinks
was cited as an indicator of phishing, and a few respondents were
skeptical of any email that required password changes at all.
Third, a password-reuse notification should lead to actions that
improve the security of the directly affected online account. Ideally,
this would include taking productive actions for other accounts
that may be at risk (i.e., those where similar passwords were used),
as well as advising against unproductive or unrelated actions.
Fourth, the background information provided by a notification
should be easily understood. In Study 1, 12.8 % of respondents were
confused by how one service “got” their passwords for another
service, which could potentially lead to confusion. Not all users will
understand the mechanisms behind password databases or cryptographic hashes, but the root cause of the notification (password
reuse) must be clearly conveyed.
Table 2: Notification dimensions varied in Study 2.
Delivery Medium
model Delivered by email
inApp Mobile in-app
mobile Mobile push notification and in-app
Incident
model This incident was likely a data breach of a service
unrelated to AcmeCo, but because many people reuse
similar passwords on multiple sites, your AcmeCo login
information may have been affected.
usBreach This incident was likely a data breach of one of our
services.
vagueCause —
Account Activity
model While we have not detected any suspicious activity on
your AcmeCo account, . . . as a precaution.
suspicious Because we have detected suspicious activity on your
AcmeCo account, . . .
omitActivity —
Remediation
model . . . you must create a new password . . .
recommend . . . we recommend that you create a new password.
Other Accounts
model Change all similar passwords on other accounts.
noOthers —
Extra Actions
model To further improve your online security, we recommend:
• Enabling AcmeCo’s Two-Factor Authentication.
• Using a password manager.
noExtras —
Fifth and finally, notifications should improve trust between
providers and users. Account providers send notifications to increase the security of users’ accounts with that provider, as well
as potentially with other providers, too. Therefore, notifications
should aim to engender users’ trust.
6 STUDY 2
In Study 1, we found that the content of a password-reuse notification impacted respondents’ understanding of the situation at hand,
as well as whether they would intend to take action in response.
In Study 2, we sought to better isolate the factors of effective notifications by exploring the impact of making small changes to the
content or delivery of these notifications. Our design of Study 2
focuses on key results from Study 1, along with the goals outlined
in Section 5. We had six core research questions for Study 2.
First, we consider the delivery medium. The timeliness of a
notification is largely determined by how it is sent to the recipient.
Mobile push notifications interrupt the current workflow, whereas
emails or in-app notifications require users to actively check those
sources. The delivery medium of the notification may also change
respondents’ perception of the legitimacy of the notification.
RQ 1A: How does the delivery medium of a password-reuse notification affect its perceived effectiveness?
RQ 1B: If you, an online account provider, are breached, how important is the delivery medium in which you send your notification?
Next, we consider mentions of suspicious account activity and
the nature of the data breach. These details address the goal of providing adequate background for users to understand the situation.
RQ 2: How does explicitly identifying the root causes of the incident
influence the notification’s effectiveness?
Session 8B: Usable Passwords CCS’18, October 15-19, 2018, Toronto, ON, Canada 1555
RQ 3: How does mentioning suspicious account activity influence
the notification’s effectiveness?
Depending on the importance of the account and the incident,
notifications should force a password reset.
RQ 4: If a password change is only recommended, instead of required, will users report that they would change their passwords?
Finally, we consider various security suggestions beyond password changes. We hypothesize that these suggestions could improve the user’s trust in the account provider by appearing to
demonstrate proactive approaches to security.
RQ 5A: Is it important to explicitly recommend password changes
on other sites in a notification?
RQ 5B: Is it important to explicitly recommend pro-security actions
(e.g., 2FA, adopting a password manager) in a notification?
RQ 5C: If your service is breached, is it important to explicitly
recommend password changes on other sites and pro-security behaviors beyond changing your password?
RQ 6: Will users report taking pro-security actions if they are not
explicitly mentioned in a password-reuse notification?
6.1 Study 2 Conditions
We began developing our Study 2 conditions by creating a model
notification (shown in Figure 4) that synthesized the individual aspects of notifications that were most successful in Study 1, filling in
gaps relative to our aforementioned design goals. To disambiguate
the impact of each aspect of the model notification’s content and delivery, we created 14 additional variants of the model, each of which
differed in a targeted way. These variants, as detailed in Table 2,
reflect changes in the delivery method, description of the security incident, mention of account activity, suggested remediation,
reference to other accounts, and additional pro-security actions
mentioned. Each respondent was randomly assigned to see either
the model notification or one of these fourteen variants. When
presenting our results, we refer to these variants using multi-part
names based on the nomenclature defined in Table 2. Special attention was given to increase the likelihood that our respondents
perceived the notification as legitimate, rather than as phishing.
Appendix B.2 contains additional images of the variants.
6.2 Study 2 Structure and Recruitment
We recruited respondents on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, again
advertising a survey about online account notifications with no
mention of security or privacy. Requirements for participation were
the same as for Study 1, and participation in both Study 1 and
Study 2 was prevented. The survey was again scenario-based, but
this survey was structured into five sections and added additional
questions to explore topics raised during the analysis of Study 1.
Each respondent was compensated with $2.50 for completing the
15-minute survey. Respondents were introduced to the survey scenario with the same text as Study 1 (cf. Section 3.1) and were then
presented with their assigned notification.
The first section of survey questions measured respondents’
overall reported conceptions of the notification with questions
similar to Study 1, but with a key modification: respondents were
given eleven closed-answer choices of the causes of receiving the
notification. We chose to give closed-answer choices to measure
explicitly whether or not they expected some factor might have
caused the situation, rather than relying just on what they thought
to write. We based these choices on the responses to Study 1’s
open-ended version.
The second section asked whether respondents would intend to
change their passwords for AcmeCo, as well as for other accounts.
This section also contained follow-up questions about why they
would or would not intend to change their passwords, as well as
how they would create and memorize such passwords. The third
section asked them to report their security perceptions of, and
likelihood to take, ten actions beyond changing their password.
These actions were again closed-answer and were selected based
on free-text responses from Study 1.
The fourth section asked respondents about their perceptions
of the notification with questions based on the corresponding section from Study 1 but modified to align with Study 2’s research
questions. The final section solicited the following demographic
information: gender, age, highest educational degree attained, and
technical expertise. We also asked respondents to report any previous experiences being notified about data breaches and history
of having others gain unauthorized access to their online accounts.
Appendix A.2 contains the survey text. As in Study 1, responses
are reported behavioral intentions, rather than actual behavior. We
again mitigated biases with softening language and pre-testing.
6.3 Analysis Method and Metrics
We again use regression models in our analysis. We had both binary (whether respondents selected each of the eleven potential
causes, whether respondents reported intending to change any passwords or take the ten additional actions) and ordinal (responses
on scales regarding perceptions of the notification, as well as a
Likert-scale agreement with the security benefit of the ten actions)
dependent variables. For binary dependent variables, we built logistic regression models. For ordinal dependent variables, we built
ordinal logistic regression models. The independent variables were
the notification, all covariates used in Study 1 (the respondent’s age
range, gender, education level, and technical background), whether
the respondent had ever been notified that their information was
exposed in a data breach and whether the respondent had experienced unauthorized access to an online account. These final two
variables are proxies for prior experience with breaches [47, 49].
All independent variables were treated as categorical.
As in Study 1, we built parsimonious models through backward
elimination. The full regression tables are again contained in our
companion technical report. To determine whether the omnibus
notification term was significant, we compared these final models
to their analogous null models (removing the notification term) to
calculate an omnibus p-value, which we report as the regression
p-value. If the notification term was removed in backward elimination, we treated the notification as non-significant. For significant
individual factors, we report the odds ratio and p-value.
When the omnibus notification term was significant, we made
18 comparisons between pairs of notifications to investigate our
six research questions directly. For ordinal data, we used MannWhitney U tests (reporting U and the p-value). For categorical data
more naturally expressed as a contingency table (e.g., whether and
Session 8B: Usable Passwords CCS’18, October 15-19, 2018, Toronto, ON, Canada 1556
how respondents intended to change their password), we performed
χ
2
tests if all cell counts were greater than five, and Fisher’s Exact
Test (denoted FET) if they were not. We again set α = .05 and used
Holm correction within each family of tests.
Finally, in a process analogous to that for Study 1, we qualitatively coded free-response data.
7 STUDY 2 RESULTS
Across all variants of the model notification, respondents reported
anticipating serious consequences to ignoring the notification and
reported believing that changing their password would benefit
their account security. While a majority of respondents indicated
that they would intend to change their passwords, their intended
password creation strategies would continue to expose them to
password-reuse attacks. Unfortunately, many respondents did not
perceive password reuse to be the root cause of the situation.
We found that adding extra security suggestions increases perceived risks, which may help the notification convey the seriousness
of the situation and the need to take action. Omitting information
about account activity or being vague about the origin of the security incident, however, warps perceptions of the situation.
7.1 Respondents
There were 588 respondents in Study 2. Most respondents were between the ages of 25 and 34 (44.6 %), although 11.2 % were younger
and 44.1 % were older. 48.4 % of the respondents identified as female. Over half of our respondents had a two- or four-year degree,
and 10.8 % held higher degrees. A quarter of respondents reported
experience (education or job) in technical fields.
53.2 % of respondents in Study 2 indicated that they had been
affected by a prior data breach. Most respondents were notified via
email (55.9 %), although receiving physical mail (17.3 %) and reading
the news or browsing social media (18.2 %) were other common
notification methods. The most common data breach mentioned
by respondents was Equifax (12.1 % of respondents). Less than onethird of respondents reported unauthorized access to an account.
Of the 188 respondents that reported someone had gained unauthorized access to one of their online accounts, 23 personally knew
the attacker, whereas 155 did not.
7.2 Perceived Causes of the Scenario
Many respondents did not perceive password reuse to be a
cause of the situation. From among eleven potential causes of
receiving the notification, we asked respondents to choose all they
felt applied. Unfortunately, across all notifications, a minority of
respondents chose “you reused the same or similar passwords for
multiple online accounts” as a potential cause even though many
variants of the notification mentioned password reuse. For example, the model notification (control condition) explained that their
“AcmeCo account login and password may have been compromised”
due to a data breach of a service unrelated to AcmeCo “because
many people reuse similar passwords on multiple sites.” Nonetheless, only 44.7 % of respondents who saw the model notification
chose password reuse as a cause of receiving the notification.
The rate of selecting password reuse as a cause varied by condition (regression p < .001). Among all variants, model-{suspicious}
(named using the keywords in Table 2) was most effective at conveying that password reuse was a potential cause. This variant
augmented the model notification by noting suspicious activity had
been detected on the account. Nonetheless, only 57.9 % of respondents chose password reuse as a possible cause, which did not differ
significantly from the control. Unsurprisingly, four variants that
mentioned that AcmeCo itself suffered a breach had significantly
lower rates of choosing password reuse as a cause: model-{usBreach}-
-{mobile} (2.4 %, OR = 0.03, p < 0.001); model-{usBreach}-{inApp}
(2.4 %, OR = 0.03, p = 0.001); model-{usBreach}-{noOthers} (10.0 %,
OR = 0.13, p = 0.001); and model-{usBreach}-{noOthers}-{noExtras}
(2.6 %, OR = 0.03, p = 0.001).
For model-{vagueCause}, 10.3 % of respondents chose password
reuse as a cause, which was also significantly lower than the control
(OR = 0.16, p = 0.003). This is notable because that notification
mentions a vaguely-worded “potential security incident” that may
have led to a credential compromise, typical of many widely deployed notifications even when password reuse is the culprit.
Respondents also rarely chose “you have a weak password for
your AcmeCo account” as a potential cause. Across conditions, only
15.0 % of respondents selected this option. This did vary significantly
by condition (regression p = .011), though we only observed a
significant difference for the pair of conditions investigating the
impact of mentioning suspicious activity (RQ3). While 38.9 % of
respondents indicated a weak password as a potential cause for
model-{suspicious}, which mentioned suspicious activity, only 4.9 %
did so for model-{omitActivity}, which did not (FET, p = .009).
In contrast, across all notifications, respondents most commonly
chose that “AcmeCo was hacked” (49.0 % of respondents) or that a
company unrelated to AcmeCo was hacked (41.7 %). Note, however,
that conditions varied in whether they reported that AcmeCo or
some other company was breached, so these frequencies and the significant differences between conditions (both regressions p < .001)
are unsurprising. More surprisingly, across conditions respondents
selected three additional potential causes at higher rates than password reuse: “Someone hacked your AcmeCo account” (32.5 % of
respondents); “AcmeCo conducts regular security checks and this
is just a standard security notification” (28.2 %); “Someone is trying
to gain unauthorized access to your account by sending this email”
(27.4 %). These did not vary significantly across conditions.
7.3 Creating New Passwords
Respondents rated whether fifteen potential actions would improve
their account security. Six of these actions related to password
changes. In addition, respondents selected whether or not “if [they]
received this notification about an online account [they] had with
a real company” they would change their password for that company. For brevity, we refer to this below as changing their AcmeCo
password. We also asked them to report their likelihood to take five
actions related to changing passwords, but for services other than
the one that sent them the notification.
Most respondents perceived unique passwords as good for
security. Overall, 86.0 % of respondents agreed that changing their
AcmeCo password to “a completely new password unrelated to the
old one” would improve their account security. Most cited a “better
safe than sorry” rationale for changing their password. For example,
Session 8B: Usable Passwords CCS’18, October 15-19, 2018, Toronto, ON, Canada 1557
Account Intention to Change Passwords
AcmeCo
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Change Keep Same
Other Providers
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
All Same Similar Important None
Figure 5: Respondents’ intentions for creating new passwords for their account on AcmeCo (who sent the notification) and on other providers. Respondents could change all
passwords, only passwords that were the same or similar,
only passwords for important accounts, or none at all.
Account Password-Change Strategy
AcmeCo
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Other Providers 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
PW
Manager
Completely
New
Modify Reuse Other
Figure 6: Of respondents who intended to change passwords,
their stated strategies for doing so for their account on
AcmeCo and on other providers. They could generate a new
password with a password manager or browser, make a completely new password, modify the old password, reuse a password they already use, or apply some other strategy.
R55 wrote, “It would bring me peace of mind to know I had done
what I could to protect myself and my account.” Yet, 34.6 % also
answered that changing their AcmeCo password to “a modification. . . of the old one” would improve their account security, while
26.0 % answered similarly about changing their AcmeCo password
“to a password I use for another online account.”
To prevent password-reuse attacks, users should have a unique
password for each account, and 84.1 % of respondents agreed that
doing so would improve their account security. However, a concerningly large fraction of respondents — 50.2 % — agreed that changing
“all of my similar passwords on other online accounts to one new
password” would improve their security. Unfortunately, doing so
makes them susceptible to future password-reuse attacks. We did
not observe significant differences in responses across conditions
for any of these six actions related to password changes.
If they received our notification in real life, respondents
would change their password, but ineffectively. The vast majority of respondents — 90.3 % — reported they would change their
passwords if, in real life, they received the notification they saw (Figure 5). However, among these respondents, only 1.4 % of them said
they would change their password to something completely unrelated. Additionally, only 9.7 % of them said they would use a
password manager or their browser to generate the password.
The majority of respondents’ new passwords would continue
to expose their accounts to the same risks (Figure 6). Most respondents — 59.0 % — reported intending to create their new AcmeCo
password by changing a few characters in the old password, while
11.4 % reported intending to simply reuse another password they
already used elsewhere. In reality, these strategies would not truly
resolve their problems and would continue to facilitate passwordreuse attacks. Attackers have adapted to users’ tendency to modify
passwords in small ways (e.g., common character substitutions,
insertions, and capitalizations) and apply such common transformations in password-reuse attacks [10, 62]. Furthermore, self-reported
intentions typically overreport actual behavior [58], suggesting that
these results may already be overly optimistic.
Respondents’ stated likelihood to “leave [their AcmeCo] password as-is” varied by condition (regression p = .012). Respondents
who saw model-{noOthers}-{noExtras} were more likely to say they
would keep their current password than those who saw model
(OR = 2.4, p = .042) or model-{noOthers} (W = 533, p = .040).
Respondents were also more likely to state the same if they had not
previously received a data-breach notification (OR = 1.4, p = .034)
or if they had a background in technology (OR = 1.5, p = .038). We
hypothesize this last result may stem from overconfidence.
Some perceptions of security also varied across demographic
factors. Female respondents were more likely to rate having unique
passwords for all accounts as secure (OR = 1.5, p = .012) and less
likely to rate keeping their current password as secure (OR = 0.6,
p = .008). Respondents who had not previously received a databreach notification were more likely to rate modifying their old
password as secure (OR = 1.4, p = .017) and less likely to rate
changing it to something unrelated as secure (OR = 0.6, p = .002).
Surprisingly, respondents with a background in technology were
also less likely to rate the latter as secure (OR = 0.6, p = .007).
Those who avoid password changes may do so due to suspicion of notifications or invincibility beliefs. Of the 52 respondents (9 % of the total) who said they would not change their
password, 25 reported that it was because they would need to verify
that the notification was legitimate, rather than a phishing attack.
R534 elaborated that they would “wait and go to AcmeCo’s website
and see what was going on first.” Eight others said they would not
change their password because of memorability concerns.
Seventeen respondents expressed various beliefs of invincibility:
eleven said they use unique passwords on every account and thus
would not worry about one password being compromised, while
six believed their passwords were strong enough to eliminate the
risk of compromise. As R2 wrote, “It is a very good password and I
doubt someone would waste the time trying to crack it.” While nonexperts have difficulties judging password strength [60], Pearman
et al. observed in an in-situ study of 154 participants an average
password strength that could resist up to 1012 guesses [44]. At the
same time, real-world offline guessing attacks are on the order of 109
to 1012 guesses per day on a single GPU even against hash functions
like scrypt [25]. Others consider 1014 guesses realistic in offline
attacks [18]. While rate-limiting and risk-based authentication slow
online guessing [21], password reuse remains a threat [38, 57].
Most respondents believed changing passwords for other
accounts with similar passwords would improve security, yet
they did not intend to do so. Even though, as previously mentioned, 84.1 % of respondents agreed that using unique passwords
for each of their accounts would improve security, 35.2 % of respondents reported that they did not intend to change passwords for
Session 8B: Usable Passwords CCS’18, October 15-19, 2018, Toronto, ON, Canada 1558
Taking Other Security Actions Action improves security? Intention to take action?
Related to current situation
Enable 2FA
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Use a password manager
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Update security questions
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Review recent activity
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Tangentially related
Update software more frequently
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Lock phone
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Lock computer
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Change password more frequently
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Use an identity theft protection service
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Strongly
agree
Agree Disagree Strongly
disagree
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Very
likely
Likely Unlikely Very
unlikely
Figure 7: Respondents’ perceptions of whether actions would increase security, as well as their stated intention (across conditions) of taking those actions upon receiving the notification. We group actions by whether they relate to password reuse.
any accounts other than AcmeCo. As Figure 5 shows, an additional
15.6 % only intended to do so for accounts where they used exactly
the same password, while 14.1 % only intended to change passwords
for important accounts. The largest portion of respondents would
not change their passwords on other accounts because they did
not perceive connections between the account addressed by the
notification and any other account. R69 explained, “Unless I heard
from a company that was hacked, I’m not concerned.” Furthermore,
respondents believed that if the account providers were unrelated,
then the risks to account security also must be unrelated. A few
respondents speculated that the threats were unrelated because “a
potential hacker likely doesn’t know my additional accounts exist”
(R23). Unfortunately, because reuse of both usernames and passwords across services is common [10, 62], attackers know to try
the same or similar credentials across unrelated services.
In contrast, only 15.3 % of respondents reported intending to
change their passwords on all other accounts, while 19.7% reported
intending to change all passwords that were similar to the one
that was compromised. Unfortunately, even for respondents who
said they would intend to change other passwords, their intended
password-creation strategies would leave many at risk. The majority of respondents again intended to either modify (46.5 %) or
directly reuse (9.6 %) passwords they already used elsewhere, as
shown in Figure 6. On a more positive note, 38.8 % of respondents
reported intending to use a password manager or browser to generate these other passwords, which balances usability and security
for changing many passwords at once.
7.4 Taking Other Security-Related Actions
For nine additional actions unrelated to password changes, respondents again rated their expectation of how these actions impact
security, as well as their likelihood to take these actions upon receiving the notification. Notifications should encourage actions
that are both productive and relevant for addressing password reuse.
To account for these nuances, we included four actions that can
potentially address password reuse, as well as five that are only
tangentially related to the situation, as shown in Figure 7.
Notifications encourage 2FA adoption, yet are less effective at encouraging the use of password managers. The notifications had a divergent impact on two of the actions most relevant
to mitigating threats from password reuse: enabling 2FA and using
a password manager. While 83.3 % of respondents agreed that enabling 2FA would improve their security and 64.0 % rated it likely
that they would do so, only 44.3 % agreed that using a password
manager would improve their security, and only 37.3 % rated it
likely they would adopt one after receiving the notification.
In contrast, 78.8 % of respondents agreed changing their password more frequently would improve security, and 51.9 % rated it
likely they would do so. Furthermore, 80.9 % of respondents agreed
that reviewing the recent activity on their account would improve
security, and 89.5 % rated it likely they would do so.
Notification variants did not impact the likelihood of taking these actions. Which notification respondents saw did not
significantly impact their stated likelihood of taking any of these
nine actions. However, some demographic factors did. Respondents
with a background in technology expressed a higher likelihood of
using a password manager (OR = 1.7, p = .002), using an identity
theft protection service (OR = 1.6, p = .008), and changing the
way they lock their phone (OR = 1.4, p = .033) upon receiving
the notification. Finally, female respondents expressed being more
likely to review the activity on their account (OR = 1.5, p = .022).
Session 8B: Usable Passwords CCS’18, October 15-19, 2018, Toronto, ON, Canada 1559
Notification variants minimally impacted security perceptions. Respondents’ agreement that updating their account’s security questions would improve security varied across notifications
(regression p = .012), though we did not observe the notification to
significantly impact perceptions of any of the other eight actions.
Compared to respondents who saw model, those who saw model-
{vagueCause} (OR = 2.7, p = .017) or model-{suspicious} (OR = 3.5,
p = .004) were more likely to agree that updating their security
questions would improve security. We observed the same effect
for three notifications that mentioned that AcmeCo itself had been
breached: model-{usBreach}-{mobile} (OR = 3.6, p = .002), model-
-{usBreach}-{inApp} (OR = 2.4, p = .035), and model-{usBreach}-
-{noOthers} (OR = 2.6, p = .026). Female respondents were more
likely to agree that it would improve security (OR = 1.4, p = .047),
while those who had never received a data-breach notification were
less likely to do so (OR = 0.6, p = .009).
Demographic factors were correlated with variations in respondents’ perceptions of how these actions impacted security. Female
respondents were more likely to agree that using an identity theft
protection service (OR = 1.6, p = .003), changing their password
more frequently (OR = 1.7, p = .001), and changing how they
lock their computer (OR = 1.5, p = .011) would improve security. Respondents with a background in technology (OR = 0.5,
p < .001) and those who had never received a data-breach notification (OR = 0.7, p = .015) were also less likely to agree with
this statement. Respondents with a background in technology were
also less likely to agree that changing their password in the future
improves security (OR = 0.7, p = .023), while those who had never
received a data-breach notification were less likely to agree that
updating software improves security (OR = 0.7, p = .043).
7.5 Perceptions of the Notification
Most respondents would act in response within 24 hours. We
found that most respondents would anticipate seeing and acting
on the notification within a short period of time, despite our notifications varying in delivery method. 87.4 % reported that they
would see the notification within 24 hours and 84.5 % would intend
to take action within 24 hours; responses did not vary significantly
across notifications. Respondents strongly preferred that account
providers contact them via email (90.0 %), although SMS (43.9 %),
mobile app (32.5 %), and mobile push notification (29.1 %) were also
favorable options. Interestingly, this stated preference for email
notifications conflicts with some respondents’ hesitation to take
action because of phishing concerns (Section 7.3).
Respondents’ trust was lower when AcmeCo suffered a
breach. We found that the level of reported trust varied significantly across notification conditions (regression p = .004). Compared to model, the reported trust of the provider was, perhaps
unsurprisingly, lower for model-{usBreach}-{inApp}, which stated
that AcmeCo itself was breached (OR = 0.3, p = .003). In their
free-response justification, 13.8 % respondents overall reported decreased trust because they believed it to be AcmeCo’s responsibility
to prevent such breaches. On the contrary, 8.3 % of respondents’
trust did not change, as “any company is bound to have security
breaches” (R196). However, across conditions, 45.2 % of respondents
increased trust in AcmeCo as a result of the notification, and 35.8 %
reported no change. This was because the notification conveyed a
prioritization of their safety (29.3 %) or proactive and transparent
policies (13.3 %). An additional 15.1 % of respondents believed that
such a notification was simply expected of a company.
Experience with technology and data breaches impacted
perceptions. In our models, we also compared the responses of
respondents who had prior experience with data breaches to those
who had no such experiences. Respondents who had never been
notified about being in a breach reported that receiving the notification would lead to greater trust in AcmeCo compared to those
who had previously received a data-breach notification (OR = 1.7
p = .002). Respondents who had never received such a notification
were also more likely to agree that they would not know why they
received such a notification (OR = 1.6, p = .002), more likely to
perceive the notification as official (OR = 1.6, p = .009), and less
likely to expect companies to send notifications like the one they
saw (OR = 0.7, p = .043). This may be because prior experience
gives respondents some expectations of provider behavior.
Respondents who reported a background in technology were
more likely to agree that they would not know why they received
such a notification (OR = 1.6, p = .008) and more likely to agree that
ignoring the notification would have no consequences (OR = 1.6,
p = .006). They were also less likely to agree that they expected
companies to send such notifications (OR = 0.6, p = .010), less
likely to agree that they would believe such a notification was
official (OR = 0.5, p < .001), and less likely to prioritize taking
action in response (OR = 0.7, p = .031). They were also less likely
to agree that the notification explained how to resolve the situation
(OR = 0.6, p = .007) and less likely to report that they would feel
grateful about receiving the notification (OR = 0.6, p < .001).
8 LIMITATIONS
Like many survey studies, our results suffer from self-report biases.
Respondents may have answered questions according to social
desirability: selecting the answer they believe they should select,
rather than their true answer [35]. To mitigate this bias, we did not
explain that this was a study about security, and we included softening language in sensitive questions to remind respondents that
people may have many different responses. That said, stated intentions are typically an upper bound on actual behavior [58]. As many
respondents’ intended actions would still leave them vulnerable to
further attacks, reality may be even worse. This would be consistent with other researchers’ finding that LinkedIn’s actual breach
notification was ineffective at prompting password resets [29].
Finally, we report on a convenience sample of MTurk workers
receiving our hypothetical notifications. Such a design is inherently limited in its ecological validity. However, given that such
notifications have rarely been studied, testing notifications for the
first time in the field and potentially causing respondents to think
they had been breached would create too high of a potential risk
to human subjects. As in prior work on other types of notification
messages [15], we chose to conduct a formative, controlled study
to inform future research on password-reuse notifications.
Session 8B: Usable Passwords CCS’18, October 15-19, 2018, Toronto, ON, Canada 1560
Figure 8: The notification we found to be the most effective,
relative to our notification goals, for respondents in Study 2.
9 DISCUSSION
We performed the first systematic study of how users understand
and intend to respond to security notifications about situations
related to password reuse. Through two complementary user studies, we identified best practices for the design of password-reuse
notifications. Further, we identified where notifications are destined
to fall short in helping users fully remediate password reuse issues.
Our formative study lays the groundwork for future field studies.
We recommend future work that does not rely on self-reporting,
instead testing the best practices we developed for password-reuse
notifications in more ecologically valid situations.
9.1 Best Practices
Our Study 1 results led us to identify five key design goals for
password-reuse notifications (Section 5). Some goals (e. g., timeliness) are obvious from general guidelines about warning design,
but the importance of providing an adequate background, as well
as the subtle considerations around engendering trust, are more
specific to the domain of password reuse. Our model notification
in Study 2 performed the best according to these goals, suggesting
these best practices for designing password-reuse notifications:
• The notification should be very explicit about the root causes
of the situation, i. e., password reuse and a data breach.
• Providers should force a password reset on their service.
• The notification should strongly encourage changing similar
passwords on other accounts and thoroughly explain why
doing so staves off attacks.
• The notification should explicitly encourage enabling 2FA
and using password managers.
• Notifications should be sent via both email and more immediate channels (e.g., a blocking notification upon login).
Table 3: How 24 real-world password-reuse notifications
compare to our Study 2 model notification’s best practices.
Notifications are identified by their sender (and additional
details if we collected multiple from the same provider).
Notification
Delivered by email
Mentions
password reuse
Forces password
change
Suggests changing
similar passwords
Suggests 2FA and
password manager
Adobe ✓ ✓
Amazon ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Carbonite ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Digital Ocean ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Edmodo ✓ ✓
Evernote ✓ ✓ ✓
Facebook (Accessed) ✓ ✓
Facebook (Confirm Identity)
Facebook (Logged In) ✓
Freelancer ✓ ✓ ✓
Google (2-Step) ✓
Google (Someone Has. . .) ✓
Google (Suspicious)
Houzz ✓ ✓ ✓
Instagram ✓
LinkedIn ✓ ✓
Microsoft ✓
Netflix ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Pinterest (Read-Only) ✓
Pinterest (Suspicious) ✓ ✓
Sony ✓
SoundCloud ✓ ✓
Spirit ✓ ✓
Spotify ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Therefore, we propose the wording of Figure 8 as a model notification for situations related to password reuse. Unfortunately,
few real-world notifications currently follow these best practices.
Table 3 compares the 24 real-world notifications we collected in
Study 1 to the best practices we identified. None of these notifications met all of the best practices we established. In short, there is
much room for improvement in widely deployed notifications.
9.2 Addressing Persistent Misunderstandings
While the real notifications we tested in Study 1 were successful
in arousing concern, many respondents were unaware of the correct
actions to take in response. The model notification we synthesized
for Study 2, and its variants were successful in spurring the vast
majority of respondents to report that they would change their
password on the site that sent them the notification. This apparent
success was tempered, however, by respondents reporting that their
new password would often be a minor variation on their previous
passwords, or even simply a password reused verbatim from another
account. Furthermore, many respondents reported that they would
leave their passwords unchanged on providers other than the one
that sent them the notification. Collectively, these decisions would
leave users vulnerable to future attacks leveraging password reuse.
The model notification had mixed success at encouraging respondents to take two other actions that could potentially mitigate
password reuse. Users adopting 2FA erects another barrier for attackers in exploiting reused credentials, and nearly two-thirds of
respondents reported being likely to do so after receiving the notifications we tested. Users adopting a password manager and using
it to generate unique, strong passwords for each site is among the
small number of usable solutions to combat password reuse, yet
Session 8B: Usable Passwords CCS’18, October 15-19, 2018, Toronto, ON, Canada 1561
under 40 % of respondents reported being likely to do so. These
intentions did not vary significantly whether or not the notification
explicitly encouraged respondents to take these actions. Future
work could investigate whether describing the exact situation the
given user is in even more explicitly, as well as why these particular
actions are crucial in mitigation, might be more successful.
Our work thus underscores that it is unreasonable to expect
users to maintain dozens of distinct and secure passwords simply
by telling them to do so. Although notifications are a critical source
of information to incite positive change in users’ online security behaviors, they are only a band-aid on a gaping wound. In addition to
improving notifications, we recommend devising ecosystem-level
strategies to combat password reuse. Individual account providers
cannot prevent password reuse across services without direct cooperation with others [64]. As our respondents already expressed
much confusion about how providers “had this information in the
first place, who they got it from and how they got it” (R159), other
actors may be better positioned to make a difference.
Password managers and web browsers have a unique viewpoint
on the full spectrum of a user’s passwords that individual providers
do not. Specifically, they have the opportunity to identify and prevent password reuse when users create, change, or import passwords. Unfortunately, current implementations of many password
managers and browsers permit users to reuse passwords across
accounts, often not even warning those users about why this is
problematic. This behavior could be out of fear that users would
not use those password managers or browsers if they felt burdened
by onerous actions. Future work should thus investigate how password managers and browsers can be more explicit in preventing
password reuse while maintaining a positive user experience. The
current state of password reuse results from many actors’ decisions.
Remediation will require the contributions of many more.