Abstract
We compared psychological distance in a mock job interview that was conducted either in-person or via mobile telepresence. In the mobile telepresence setting, the interviewers communicated through a telepresence robot. In one of the first explorations of how mobile telepresence affected psychological distance, we analyzed use of pronouns that suggested distance or closeness, and we also analyzed interviewer behavior (backchanneling) across the conditions. In addition, we analyzed stories told as part of the interview. We looked at elements of the stories as well as how interviewees interacted with physical objects on a table in front of them. We found that mobile telepresence disrupts conversational processes and content and amplifies psychological distance. There were fewer backchannels in the mobile telepresence setting and changed story elements. Interviewees also made use of objects differently in the mobile telepresence setting. Pronoun use went against our hypotheses, but can be interpreted as a response to psychological distance. Taken together, the evidence suggests that in-person interviews are more grounded and interactive than interviews via mobile telepresence robots.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
mobile telepresence

grounding constraints

backchannels

narrative structure

object manipulation

pronouns

1. Introduction
Communication technologies have proliferated in the 21st century, along with many new and different ways to communicate through speaking, typing, and image sharing, both in real time and asynchronously. We now use these technologies to communicate with family, friends, co-workers, and even potential employers. But our understanding of how different technologies affect production and comprehension of ideas, and how communication changes with different types of addressees, has not kept pace with the growth of the technologies. One domain where telepresence is increasingly used is in job interviews (e.g., the HireVue interviewing AI platform and the Tengai interviewing robot). In many companies, applicants begin with video conferencing screening interviews, with only a select number of applicants earning an in-person interview. This raises the question: In what ways does a telepresence interview change people's behavior compared with in person? One common facet of screening interviews is that people have to showcase their communication skills by telling a personal story, such as their best or worst experience with a work project.

In the current study we emulated that interview situation by examining interviews and storytelling in an in-person versus a mobile telepresence setting. Mobile telepresence is videochat coupled with the ability to move the projection. Typically, a flat screen projecting the image and voice of a person is attached to a device that can move around a space (see Fig. 1). The device's movement is controlled by a person whose image and voice are projected. When we refer to telepresence in this study, we are referring to mobile telepresence involving a telepresence robot, also known as mobile robotic telepresence.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (177KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Participant enacting a story in the telepresence condition.

We tested how mobile telepresence affected psychological distance. We define psychological distance as the feeling of closeness people have with others they interact with. Concepts similar to psychological distance include immediacy and social presence. Immediacy is the psychological distance a person feels towards an addressee, the communication medium they are using, or the communication style (Wiener & Mehrabian, 1968, cited in Short et al., 1976). Immediacy was argued by Wiener and Mehrabian (1968, cited in Short et al., 1976) to be harder to achieve with communication media where certain cues, such as facial expressions and gestures, were less accessible. Without these cues, a medium was said to lack technological immediacy. Social presence describes how noticeable an addressee is to the communicator (Short et al., 1976). In this study, we assessed psychological distance by examining how participants used language, told stories, and interacted with objects.

Participants engaged in a mock job interview, one half of which was conducted by a co-present interviewer in person, while the other half was conducted by the same interviewer via a telepresence robot. In each setting, we looked at behaviors of both the interviewees (participants) and the interviewers (researchers). On the interviewee's side, we looked at the elements of narrative that interviewees included in a subpart of the interview, storytellings, as well as how they interacted with physical objects on a table in front of them as part of their storytelling. On the interviewer's side, we looked at backchanneling, a factor that is likely to enhance interview processes. Backchannels are brief expressions such as mhm, okay, and great, which are used by conversational participants to provide evidence of understanding and also to guide the conversation (Bangerter & Clark, 2003; Tolins & Fox Tree, 2014; Yngve, 1970).

We predicted that mobile telepresence would increase psychological distance and modify the interview process in several ways, including: changes in conversational content, changes in interaction with physically-present objects, and changes in the way people coordinate their conversations.

1.1. Related Works
Many computer-mediated communication researchers have provided explanatory theoretical frameworks that characterize how different resources in mediated communication affect fundamental communication processes (Clark & Brennan, 1991; Daft & Lengel, 1984; Fox Tree et al., 2011; Herring, 1999, 2016; Sproull & Kiesler, 1991; Takayama & Harris, 2013; Whittaker, 1995, 2003; Whittaker et al., 1991). The researchers often begin with the observation that communicators seek to establish shared understanding, or common ground, as they communicate. Grounding is the process of checking for understanding as a conversation is built up.

Settings are known to affect grounding in communication (Clark & Brennan, 1991; Fox Tree et al., 2011; Gergle, Millen, et al., 2004; Gergle, Kraut, et al., 2013; Hård af Segerstad & Ljungstrand, 2002; O'Conaill et al., 1993; Whittaker, 1995, 2003; Whittaker et al., 1991; Whittaker et al., 1993). A setting where people can see and hear each other allows them to provide information using facial expressions, hand gestures, and voice. This information is unavailable in text settings. Bodily expression is unavailable in audio-only settings. Being able to communicate co-temporally (where production and comprehension can occur at the same time, such as with in-person dialogue or a walkie talkie) and simultaneously (communicators can talk over each other in person but not in walkie talkie dialogue) allows people to correct errors on the fly with little cost to the communication (Clark & Brennan, 1991; Whittaker, 2003), as even quite short lags in speech can radically disrupt communication (O'Conaill et al., 1993; Whittaker, 1995). Visual co-presence allows people to communicate more efficiently when collaborating on certain visual tasks by facilitating deictic reference via pointing and situational awareness (Gergle, Millen, et al., 2004; Whittaker et al., 1993). In mobile telepresence, however, local and remote participants might have trouble monitoring each other's perspectives and understanding due to technical limitations on what the remote participant can see and hear. This can lead to compensatory behaviors on the part of the local participant, such as broader physical gestures to attract the attention of the remote participant and increased verbal checks on understanding (Boudouraki et al., 2021).

We propose the grounding constraint of psychological distance as a way to characterize how telepresence settings differ from in-person settings. A setting with less psychological distance is one that is co-temporal, simultaneous, visually and auditorily co-present, co-located, and focused on communication. The least psychologically distant setting is in-person communication. In-person communication can have a powerful influence on people (Olson & Olson, 2000; Nardi & Whittaker, 2002). We begin by discussing what is known about mobile telepresence. We then discuss the effects of telepresence on psychological distance, storytelling, interaction with objects, pronoun choices, and backchannels.

1.1.1. Mobile telepresence
Mobile telepresence robots have been prototyped in research labs for over two decades. The earliest was Personal Roving Presence systems (Paulos & Canny, 1998), a mobile telepresence robot that displayed the remote operator's video feed on its screen and enabled that remote person to converse with local interactants. For a more specific use case, Fels et al. (2001) developed a smaller scale mobile telepresence robot for hospitalized children to remotely attend school. Similar telepresence robot systems have been developed in industrial research labs, including HP Labs’ BiReality system (Jouppi et al., 2004), which displayed the remote operator's video feed from four sides (face, back of head, and two sides of their head), and Microsoft Research's Embodied Social Proxy (Venolia et al., 2010), which was used to explore higher fidelity video and audio configurations, as well as stationary vs. mobile bases.

Mobile robotic telepresence conveys a stronger sense of the social presence of the remote participant than audio- or video-conferencing (Tanaka, Nakanishi, et al., 2014). Mobile telepresence also differs from modern videoconferencing systems in that it enables remote participants to move around in physical spaces rather than being stuck in a single location. Remote collaborators who use video-conferencing systems are often left out of informal communications (e.g., impromptu hallway conversations) (Whittaker et al., 1994), whereas having mobility enables remote people to wander through hallways, seeking out opportunities for informal communications in the workplace (Lee & Takayama, 2011).

In the past decade, telepresence robots have become more robust and less expensive, wireless networks have become more reliable and widespread, and end users are recognizing the need for more embodied forms of telepresence. Kristoffersson et al. (2013) provide an overview of telepresence robot systems, use cases, and challenges for these systems. Mobile telepresence has been studied in education (e.g., Newhart & Olson, 2017; Tanaka, Takahashi, et al., 2014), office work (Lee & Takayama, 2011), large conferences (e.g., Neustaedter et al., 2018), managing long-distance personal relationships (e.g., Yang et al., 2017), medical care (e.g., Daruwalla et al., 2010), and caregiving for older adults (e.g., Cesta et al., 2012; Michaud et al., 2007). These use cases share the common user need of better connecting with other people at a distance.

1.1.2. Effects of telepresence on psychological distance
Telepresence robots increase psychological distance in five ways that have implications for grounding. One is in co-location. Being co-located means that both communicators are aware of events that take place in their environment; for example, a knock at the door for one is a knock at the door for both. By definition, when people are using telepresence they are not co-located, and therefore they are physically distant from one another. While a telepresent communicator might hear the knock in a remote location, only the communicator co-present with the knocker can answer the door.

A second is in constriction of the communicative space. Unlike voicemail or text chat, with telepresence people can see and hear each other, and they are co-temporal and simultaneous in their communication. They can repair conversation breakdowns on the fly and anticipate each other's conversational turns in ways that are not possible in other settings. But telepresence communication is still restricted by the device's window size. With head and shoulder shots, bodily movements and hand gestures are not in the frame; thus telepresence users cannot use all the visual movement and gestural cues available in in-person settings (Whittaker & O'Conaill, 1997). Telepresence may also restrict access to situational information (Gergle et al., 2013).

A third way telepresence increases psychological distance is in its reliance on uninterrupted internet service. Glitches in service can result in frozen or blank screens and loss of connection (Kristoffersson et al., 2013). Furthermore, they can introduce lags which are destructive of conversational processes such as backchannels, interruptions, and completions that depend on very precise timing (O'Conaill et al., 1993; Whittaker, 1995).

A fourth way psychological distance is increased is through the lack of mobility of the telepresence device. This is especially true for video conferencing, where the device (a desktop or laptop computer) typically remains in the same place during a conversation (Whittaker, 1995). Telepresence robots, in contrast, are mobile, but even if a robot can turn around 360°, some effort is required to do so (Rae et al., 2014), whereas people who are in-person can easily turn their heads to a shared direction.

A fifth way is that telepresence settings allow people using the device to engage in hidden multitasking (for example, when only the head and shoulders of the person using the device are visible), taking away from the attention that the participant might otherwise devote to their interlocutor in face-to-face interaction. Multitasking is more detectable when a larger scene is visible.

For all these reasons, telepresence creates a psychological distance between communicators (Olson & Olson, 2000; Sellen, 1992). Participants seem to be less aware of people who are remote rather than co-present. In videoconferences where people are unequally distributed across multiple sites, participants direct their communication to co-present rather than remote participants, with the result that isolated remote participants are excluded and contribute less to the conversation overall (O'Conaill et al., 1993). Many other studies indicate that participants report having less sense of collaborators who they interact with over video conferencing compared with their local colleagues (Rutter & Stephenson, 1979; Sellen, 1992; Short et al., 1976). Furthermore, such physical separation directly impacts collaboration, with people being less likely to interact and co-publish with those who are remote (Kraut et al., 2002).

1.1.3. Effects of telepresence on storytelling
Mobile telepresence studies typically involve tasks that require or benefit from mobility, such as navigating a course (Takayama & Harris, 2013), collaboratively constructing an object (Rae et al., 2014), or searching for objects in physical space (Boudouraki et al., 2021). In other studies, researchers have interviewed or surveyed employees about their experiences with and attitudes towards mobile telepresence use in the workplace (Lee & Takayama, 2011). Boudouraki et al. (2021) is one of the few studies to analyze the actual video-recorded communication between local and mobile telepresence participants. The researchers employed methods of conversation analysis and politeness theory to examine requests for assistance from the remote collaborator to the local collaborator. Conversational behavior is a useful and mostly untapped performance measure of psychological distance in mobile telepresence.

Our mock-interview study was designed around communication, including informal chat at the beginning and the end of each interview and creative thinking questions and activities in the middle. One aspect of the interview required participants to recount a fairy tale. Fairy tales are folk tales that are commonly told to children about magical and imaginary beings and lands, in which the protagonists overcome adversity and achieve a happy ending (Bettelheim, 1975). According to Labov's classic analysis (Labov, 1972; Labov & Waletzky, 1967), orally recounted stories about personal experiences tend to exhibit a five-phase structure: orientation, complication, evaluation, resolution, and coda. Additionally, before a story begins there may sometimes be an abstract that sums up the story, as a quick preview of what is about to be recounted. The orientation process sets up the protagonists in the story, establishes the setting, i.e., when and where the events took place, and what occurred. The complication or complicating action details the emergent actions and events that highlight a problem that protagonists have to address. The resolution describes how the problem was resolved or the results of the story. The coda brings the story back to the present moment.

The narrative schema described above is an ideal; in actual tellings, one or more structural components may be missing for various reasons, including lack of time, an unskilled teller, shared knowledge between teller and hearer(s), or different local understandings of what a story is (Georgakopoulou, 2013). For example, rather than full-fledged, multi-part narratives, social media are characterized by “small stories” of personal experience, which often lack closure (Georgakopoulou, 2013, p. 697). The technological affordances of the medium shape the stories; stories typed in social media tend to be more multimodal, intertextual, interactive, and fragmented than the personal oral narratives described by Labov (1972).

The narratives collected in the current study, fairy tales, differed further from Labov's structure. Not all of the fairy tales included an abstract; many participants began with an orientation, i.e., setting up the protagonists and background of the narrative. This orientation included the who, what, when, and where of the story. Instead of a complication detailing events that bring about a problem, the fairy tales had an inciting moment, an initial action that caused the story to develop. The developing conflict was a series of actions causing the tension to rise. Instead of an evaluation that emphasized the point of the story, these fairy tales had a climax where something happened that showed the full crisis (Longacre, 1996). Following the climax was the resolution of the conflict. The end of the story was the coda, which includes the moral of the story.

We predicted that conversational content would be modified in mobile telepresence, with participants interviewed by the remote interviewer showing more psychological distancing and a less complex narrative structure. We predicted that the decreased psychological distance of the in-person setting would lead participants to spend more time communicating the fairy tales and to include more story elements.

1.1.4. Effects of telepresence on interaction with objects
In situations where users have to interact with objects via telepresence, having a mobility component lets users feel more present in the space (Rae et al., 2014). In one study, telepresence robot users who were aware of their interactions with objects, in this case mirrors, worked harder to improve their performance with object interactions, although they also expressed more frustration (Takayama & Harris, 2013). In a collaborative search task (Boudouraki et al., 2021), the objects intended to be found by the telepresence robot collaborator were larger and more visually salient (sheets of pink paper) than the objects to be found by the in-person collaborator (ping pong balls), so that both participants would encounter a similar level of difficulty given their capabilities. The in-person collaborator also accommodated the limitations of the telepresent user by making broader physical gestures to attract the other's attention.

In our study, we observed how the interviewees interacted with objects while telling their stories. We hypothesized that people might be more inclined to use objects when they are not co-located as a way to increase shared attention and to bridge psychological distance. In addition, increased object-interaction might accommodate the interviewer's reduced visibility due to the small size of the telepresence screen. We assessed (1) the number of objects that were used in storytelling, (2) the number of objects that were considered during this task, (3) the number of objects manipulated, (4) the number of objects moved around for storytelling, (5) the length of time from the start of storytelling to end of storytelling, and (6) the total amount of time that objects were used in storytelling. These terms are operationalized in the Methods section.

1.1.5. Effects of telepresence on pronoun choices
Different types of pronouns suggest different levels of social distance. First person pronouns can be associated with a feeling of affiliation with the interlocutor or topic, and when that feeling decreases, such as in stressful situations, the amount of first person pronouns decreases (Bradac et al., 1979). First and second person pronouns are also associated with less formal conversation, suggesting that people use these pronouns when they feel at ease with their addressee (Heylighen & Dewaele, 2002; Koppen et al., 2016).

We used the Linguistic Inquiry Word Count tool (Pennebaker et al., 2001) to analyze the frequency of pronoun use: (1) first person pronouns (e.g., I, me, my, we, our), (2) second person pronouns (you, your), and (3) third person pronouns (he, him, his, she, her, hers, they, their, theirs). We hypothesized that there would be more first and second person pronouns in the face-to-face setting because people would feel more affiliative and more interpersonal interaction would occur, and we expected to find more third person pronouns in the telepresence setting because of psychological distance (Seih et al., 2010). Because we were not sure about differences between singular and plural pronouns, we tested I, we, you, he/she, and they.

1.1.6. Effects of telepresence on backchannels
A critical aspect of communication grounding processes involves offering real-time evidence of understanding and agreement via backchannels, as well as methods for transitioning between speakers (Clark, 1996; O'Conaill et al., 1993; Tolins et al., 2018; Whittaker, 1995). There is evidence that such conversational processes are disrupted in videoconferencing, where latencies imposed by video transmissions lead to decreased backchanneling, interruptions, and disrupted turn-taking (O'Conaill et al., 1993; Whittaker, 1995). These latencies mean that the listener must let the speaker finish speaking before they can interject, because the audio may overlap and they may not hear what the other participants are saying. Furthermore, backchannels and turn-taking are disrupted even in low latency systems with high picture quality (O'Conaill et al., 1993; Sellen, 1992; Whittaker, 1995).

Backchannels are often used to provide acknowledgment that an addressee has understood what the speaker has said (Clark & Brennan, 1991). But they can also be used to encourage speakers to continue a story or to elaborate on a point (Tolins & Fox Tree, 2014, 2016). The backchannels of interest in the current report were those produced by the interviewers. The interviewers encouraged long turns from the storytellers and did not take long turns themselves. Earlier, researchers observed that backchannels were disrupted in videochat settings (O'Conaill et al., 1993; Sellen, 1992; Whittaker, 1995). Although it is possible that a more challenging communication system, such as a telepresence robot, might induce more backchannels to facilitate the conversation, a more likely possibility is that, following prior work, backchanneling will be disrupted in the telepresence condition.

Additionally, we thought that the types of backchannels used in the in-person condition versus the telepresence robot condition might differ. Generic backchannels (such as yeah) encourage speakers to continue with the next element in the story, while specific backchannels (such as wow) encourage elaboration of a prior concept (Tolins & Fox Tree, 2014). Generic backchannels might be more likely in telepresence communication, as the mode might be uncomfortable (Lee & Takayama, 2011), and tasks can be completed more quickly with backchannels that prompt continuations (Bangerter & Clark, 2003). Specific backchannels (such as oh wow) might be more likely in person, where hearers might be more comfortable inviting elaboration.

In addition to generic and specific, backchannels can also be categorized into whether they are task-related or non-task-related. In tasks, people use markers to indicate when they are moving between joint activities, such as shifting from the task to a digression or indicating completion of the project, or to indicate they are moving within a joint activity, such as continuing to collaborate on a current project (Bangerter & Clark, 2003). Vertical markers like okay and all right are used to move between joint activities, whereas horizontal markers like uh huh and yeah are used to move within joint activities (Bangerter & Clark, 2003). If the interviewer feels less comfortable using the telepresence robot, more vertical markers might be used to finish the activity more quickly.

1.2. Current Study
Our experimental design allowed us to examine four conversational effects of psychological distance within the interviews: narrative structure, the use of physical objects to enhance stories, personal pronoun choices, and backchannels. We tested the following hypotheses:

H1

Conversational content will be modified, with interviewee participants showing more psychological distancing and less complex narrative structure in mobile telepresence.

H2

Interviewees will interact with physical objects more in mobile telepresence to decrease psychological distance.

H3

Use of personal pronouns will vary based on psychological distance, with interviewee participants using more first person pronouns in the in-person setting and more third person pronouns in the mobile telepresence setting.

H4

Conversational processes such as backchannels will be less frequent in mobile telepresence, where psychological distance will disrupt backchannel use for interviewers.

That is, we predict that psychological distance will result in noticeable differences in the communicative behaviors of conversational participants.

2. Method
In our multi-part mock job interviews, interviewee participants completed similar tasks in two conditions, with an in-person interviewer and with a telepresence robot interviewer. One part of each condition involved the interviewee retelling a fairy tale to the interviewer using objects set out on a table between them.

2.1. Participants
Fifty-four interviewees participated in the study, including 53 undergraduate students from a West Coast research university in the United States and 1 participant not affiliated with the university. The undergraduate participants were sampled from the Psychology Department's participant pool and were compensated with course credit. Two participants were excluded because they declined to be filmed. Thus, the maximum number of participants possible in analyses is 52, although some analyses were done on fewer participants’ data, as discussed below.

2.2. Design
In a within-subjects design, participants interviewed with both an in-person interviewer and a telepresence interviewer in counterbalanced order (the same interviewer in both conditions). In each condition, the interviewer was one of the three research assistants (one female and two males). In the telepresence condition, the research assistant operated the telepresence robot from a room adjacent to the interview space.

2.3. Equipment
The telepresence device was a Suitable Technologies Beam+ mobile telepresence robot. The telepresence robot's “head” was an 8.6-inch x 5.4-inch flat panel liquid crystal display, two wide-angle HDR cameras, one speaker, and four microphones. Users could remotely operate the telepresence robot from any location; in this case, the location was the room next to the experiment room. The telepresence robot was 52.9 inches tall, 12.3 inches wide, and 16.4 inches deep. This is smaller in stature than an adult person but taller than a child. It weighs 39 pounds.

All participant interactions with the telepresence-robot-mediated (telepresence) and non-telepresence-robot mediated (in-person) interviewer, except for the two participants who did not consent to video and audio recording, were both video and audio recorded. Two cameras in different places were used to capture participant behavior. A GoPro Hero4 was placed on a tripod, away from the participant, at an angle to record both the participant and the interviewer or telepresence robot in the same frame. For the in-person condition, a MeCam Classic camera was fashioned as a medallion around the interviewer's neck. For the telepresence condition, we used screen recordings through Screencastify, a screen-capture software through the telepresence robot's forward-facing camera. For several interview questions, participants were asked to answer using a set of pre-selected objects on the table. These objects consisted of everyday office supplies: a box of staples, a stapler, three different colored whiteboard markers, a whiteboard eraser, three sheets of paper, two pens, a timer, and a remote control.

2.4. Procedure
Depending on the order of their conditions, participants were greeted by the interviewer either in person or via the telepresence robot. They were interviewed by the same interviewer in both conditions. See Figs. 1 and 2 for screenshots from the telepresence and in-person conditions.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (141KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Participant enacting a story in the in-person condition.

The interviewer was one of three research assistants, two males and one female. Participants were asked to read and sign a consent form on the table and then to sit at the opposite end of the table, across from the interviewer. The interviewer began with warm-up questions such as “Tell me a little bit about your work experience” and “What kind of job would you like to have in the future?” After this, participants answered a series of 10 creative thinking questions of the sort that are increasingly used in job interviews (e.g., https://fairygodboss.com/career-topics/creative-interview-questions): three verbal, two interactive, three verbal, and two interactive questions. See Fig. 3 for examples of the interview questions.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (570KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Examples of interview questions.

After the 10th question, the interviewer switched to the alternative condition. If the first condition was in person, the interviewee was told that the telepresence robot had finished charging and could now be used. If the first condition was via the telepresence robot, the interviewee was told that the telepresence robot needed to be charged, so the rest of the interview would be done in person. Ten new questions were asked, similar to the first 10: three verbal, two interactive, three verbal, and two interactive. Each condition involved acting out a fairy tale with the objects on the table. After the interview portion of the experiment, participants filled out a post-study survey.

2.5. Coding
For the narrative structure assessment, two independent raters coded transcripts of participant responses to the fairy tale question in each condition by highlighting the presence or absence of an abstract, orientation, inciting moment, developing action, climax, resolution, and coda. The intra-class correlation for judgments of the presence or absence of the abstracts was high, .89 for in-person and .95 for telepresence. See Table 1 for a comparison of structures across personal narratives and storytelling narratives, with examples of the structures from the storytelling narratives collected in this study.


Table 1. Comparison of structures across personal narratives and storytelling narratives, with an example of the structures in storytelling narratives.

Structures in Personal Experience Narratives	Structures in Storytelling Narratives	Example in Storytelling Narratives
Abstract	Abstract	This story is about the boy who cried wolf.
Orientation	Orientation	There was a boy in a town who stayed out in the fields to herd the sheep.
Complication	Inciting Moment	He's always crying ‘wolf” and townspeople thought there was actually a wolf so they went to him.
Developing Conflict	The boy continued to think it was funny so he did it again and again, and the townspeople came over to rescue him each time.
Evaluation	Climax	The wolf actually came out of the woods.
Resolution	Resolution	The wolf ate the boy and his sheep because the townspeople no longer believed his cries for help.
Coda	Coda	So that tells you not to lie for attention or else when it really happens no one will come help you; OR they lived happily ever after.
For the use of objects assessment, research assistants coded a variety of behaviors, the following of which are relevant here: (1) the number of objects that were used in storytelling (e.g., using a stapler as an airplane and using a marker to represent a person counted as two objects used in the storytelling), including setting up the objects to tell the story, (2) the number of objects that were considered during this task (e.g., touching the stapler and marker while considering using them as an airplane or person counted as considering – but not using – two objects for the task), (3) the number of objects that were transformed into new objects, or objects manipulated (e.g., taking off marker caps and stacking them or folding the paper in half), and (4) the number of objects moved around to tell the story. Coding was conducted by examining the video recordings. We also calculated the time from start of story to end of story in seconds, as well as the total amount of time that objects were used in storytelling. Intra-class correlations yielded a high degree of reliability: .73 for in-person and .97 for telepresence.

A computer program was written to identify the backchannels yeah, mhm, wow, well, uh huh, oh, and right used by interviewers, taking the whole interview into account. This program was applied to transcripts of the interviews.

3. Results
Interviewees and the interviewers combined spoke about the same amount of time in the telepresence and in-person conditions, M = 2118, SD = 661, words for in-person and M = 2148, SD = 805, words for telepresence, t(51) = .357, p = .72. There were some differences between conditions, however.

3.1. Narrative Structure
In H1, we predicted that participants in the telepresence condition would use fewer narrative structure elements than in the in-person interactions. Of the 52 participants who agreed to be filmed, 45 participants’ storytelling transcripts were used for the narrative analysis, for a total of 90 stories (one each in the in-person and telepresence conditions). Seven participants were excluded because they did not answer the storytelling question or answered too vaguely for the coders to categorize their storytelling structure (e.g., the entire story was “here is a star and it fell down”). We ran paired samples t-tests (N = 45) on the average of the two raters’ assessments for the seven story elements: abstract, orientation, inciting moment, developing action, climax, resolution, and coda. See Table 2 for means, standard deviations, and test statistics. Because we did not predict different directions of effect for each of these elements, a Holm's correction for family-wise error was not applied (Holm, 1979).


Table 2. Instances of each narrative analysis element across conditions. Asterisks indicate significance at the .05 level.

Story element	Number of instances of story element	
In-person M (SD)	Telepresence M (SD)	Test Statistics
Abstract	0.71 (0.43)	0.56 (0.49)	t(44) = 2.05,
p = .046*
Orientation	0.86 (0.29)	0.86 (0.24)	t(44)=0.00
p = 1.00
Inciting moment	0.70 (0.41)	0.58 (0.43)	t(44)=1.57
p = .125
Developing Action	0.62 (0.40)	0.68 (0.36)	t(44)=-0.84
p = .404
Climax	0.57 (0.45)	0.67 (0.38)	t(44)=-1.59
p = .118
Resolution	0.49 (0.45)	0.59 (0.43)	t(44)=-1.30
p = .202
Coda	0.14 (0.27)	0.18 (0.34)	t(44)=-0.55
p = .583
Total	4.07 (1.71)	4.11 (1.58)	t(44) = -0.17,
p = .863
Only abstracts differed across conditions. Participants produced more abstracts with the in-person interviewer than the telepresence interviewer. Orientation, inciting moment, developing action, climax, resolution, and coda were not significant. There was no difference between in-person and telepresence when the narrative elements were combined.

3.2. Interaction with objects
In H2, we predicted that participants would interact with more objects in the in-person condition. A subset of 40 participants’ object manipulation was assessed; 12 participants of the 52 who agreed to be filmed produced data that could not be coded because the camera malfunctioned or their instances of object use were unclear. For example, in one case a participant used a timer's sound to suggest fairy dust falling. Because the timer was not physically transformed, such as by taping a piece of paper to it to indicate something different from a timer, it did not count as object manipulation. Nonetheless, the behavior could be coded as manipulating the timer because the timer was pressed several times. In another instance, the object had already been manipulated from a prior interview question, and participants used the previously manipulated object to answer the question or manipulate it further. In such cases, coders could not agree on the number of times that the object had been manipulated. We chose to exclude these ambiguous cases.

We ran a paired samples t-test on interaction with objects across conditions. The number of participants in each analysis varies depending on whether or not information could be assessed. See Table 3 for means, standard deviations, and test statistics. Because we did not predict different directions of effect for each of these assessments, a Holm's correction was not applied.


Table 3. Interaction with objects results. Asterisks indicate significance at the .05 level.

Interaction with Objects	Sample Size	In Person M (SD)	Telepresence M (SD)	Test Statistics
Number of objects used in storytelling	52	6.73 (3.58)	7.06 (3.56)	t(51) = -0.79,
p = .434
Number of objects considered through touch	46	7.57 (3.29)	7.97 (3.69)	t(45) = -1.03,
p = .308
Number of objects manipulated	40	0.15 (0.38)	0.56 (1.20)	t(39) = -2.19,
p = .035*
Number of times objects were moved around	51	18.00 (9.36)	18.05 (12.22)	t(50) = -0.03,
p = .973
Time from start of story to end of story (in seconds)	52	68.45 (44.25)	69.61 (61.12)	t(51) = -.020,
p = .839
Total time: object use and storytelling
(in seconds)	52	105.64 (55.10)	114.07 (80.87)	t(51) = -1.04,
p = .304
Participants manipulated more objects in the telepresence condition than the in-person condition. The number of objects considered through touch, number of objects used in storytelling, and number of times objects were moved around did not differ across conditions. Missing data occurred for various reasons, including the camera not having a clear enough view to observe the object interaction, footage being missing, or the researchers being unable to code it even if the footage was there because it was unclear if participants had used the objects in their storytelling. There was also no difference in the time from start of story to end of story in seconds or the total amount of time that objects were used in storytelling.

3.3. Pronouns
In H3, we predicted that first and second person pronouns would be used more in the in-person setting while third person pronouns would be used more in the telepresence setting. We ran paired samples t-tests (N =52) on pronoun count and word count across conditions. See Table 4 for means, standard deviations, and test statistics. Pronouns were examined with a computer program, Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC; (Pennebaker et al., 2001)). For this portion of the analysis, transcripts of the interviews included the interview introduction, responses to 20 questions (many of which involved storytelling, such as explaining what items the interviewee would bring to an island, or acting out a scene from a movie), and the closing portion of the interview. Participants used the second person pronoun you more often in the telepresence interview. In contrast, they used the third person pronoun they more often in the in-person interview. There were no differences for the pronoun I or for third person singular pronouns he/she. Because we predicted differences depending on the type of pronoun, a Holm's correction was applied.


Table 4. Pronoun results. Asterisks indicate significance at the .05 level.

In Person M (SD)	Telepresence M (SD)	Test Statistics
Word Count	2143.44 (677.35)	2173.08 (820.92)	t(51) = -0.34,
p = .736
Pronouns	14.23 (1.68)	14.24 (1.45)	t(51) = -0.03,
p = .973
I	3.75 (0.82)	3.87 (0.81)	t(51) = -1.06,
p = .294
We	0.26 (0.15)	0.29 (0.18)	t(51) = -1.04,
p = .304
You	2.82 (0.64)	3.18 (0.72)	t(51) = -4.47,
p = .000*1
He/She	0.86 (0.50)	0.83 (0.50)	t(51) = 0.39,
p = .695
They	0.84 (0.46)	0.60 (0.32)	t(51) = 2.81,
p = .007*2
*1Holm's correction requires .01 for reliability at the .05 level

*2Holm's correction requires .0125 for reliability at the .05 level.

3.4. Backchannels
In H4, we predicted backchannel use would be less in the telepresence condition. A subset of 30 transcripts was first coded by running them through a computer program, then hand-coded by research assistants to complete the backchannel analyses. We ran exploratory analyses (paired t-tests, N = 30) on interviewer backchannel counts across conditions. See Table 5 for means, standard deviations, and test statistics. There were 1458 oks in the corpus, 832 yeahs, 291 mhms, 284 rights, 184 ohs, 62 uh huhs, 10 wows, 7 yesses, and 4 yeps. Comparing overall usage of backchannels in all 52 transcripts, we found no difference between the number of backchannels used in the telepresence condition and the number of backchannels used in the in-person condition. In the 30 double-checked transcripts, only yeah differed in backchannel use between the in-person and telepresence conditions, with the interviewer providing more backchannel yeahs in the in-person condition. Because we did not predict different directions based on backchannel types, a Holm's correction was not applied.


Table 5. Individual backchannel results for interviewer backchannels. Asterisks indicate significance at the .05 level.

Backchannel	Number in Corpus	In Person (M, SD)	Telepresence (M, SD)	Test Statistics
Okay	1458	756
(24.53, 12.74)	702
(24.23, 12.61)	t(29) = .80, p = .43
Yeah	832	446
(15.17, 11.52)	386
(12.87, 8.39)	t(29) = 2.72, p = .01*
Mhm	391	216
(7.2, 6.6)	175
(5.97, 6.11)	t(29) = 1.47, p = .14
Right	284	137
(4.33, 4.76)	147
(4.13, 4.88)	t(29) =-.66, p = .57
Oh	184	103
(3.43, 2.67)	81
(2.63. 2.09)	t(29) = 1.13, p = .27
Uh huh	63	32
(1.07, 1.20)	31
(1.03, 1.61)	t(29) = .25, p = .80
Yes	11	3
(.1, .4)	8
(.27, .45)	t(29) = .32, p = .75
Wow	10	3
(.1, .31)	7
(.23, .43)	t(29) = -1.68, p = .10
Yep	5	3
(.1, .4)	2
(.07, .25)	t(29) = .81, p = .42
TOTAL M(SD)	3237	50.52 (26.31)	45.19 (25.14)	t(29) = -1.79, p = .07
There were also about six times as many generic backchannels as specific backchannels: 1185 mhm, uh huh, and yeah to 194 ohs and wows. Collapsing across generic backchannels (yeah, yes, yep, mhm, uh huh) and specific backchannels (wow, oh) showed that there were more generic backchannels than specific backchannels in the in-person condition. See Table 6 for a summary of findings for generic and specific backchannels. Because we did not predict different directions based on backchannel types, a Holm's correction was not applied.


Table 6. Generic and specific backchannel results for interviewer backchannels. Asterisks indicate significance at the .05 level.

In Person M (SD)	Telepresence M (SD)	Test Statistics
Generic	23.63 (16.67)	14.03 (9.48)	t(29) = 4.15, p < .001*
Specific	3.43 (2.61)	2.87 (2.22)	t(29) =.96, p = .34
There were 1.5 times as many vertical markers as horizontal, 1742 okay and right to 1185 mhm, uh huh, and yeah. Collapsing across vertical project markers (okay, right) and horizontal project markers (mhmm, yeah, yes, yep, uh huh) showed that there were more vertical project markers than horizontal used overall, vertical M = 55.60 (SD = 30.00) to horizontal M = 37.67 (SD = 23.96), t(29) = 4.00, p < .001. This result was driven by the high number of oks in the corpus, vertical without oks M = 8.46 (SD = 8.96) to horizontal without oks M = 37.67 (SD = 23.96), t(29) = -8.95, p < .001, in the opposite direction. See Table 7 for a summary of findings for vertical and horizontal backchannels. Because we did not predict different directions based on backchannel types, a Holm's correction was not applied.


Table 7. Vertical and horizontal backchannel results for interviewer backchannels. Asterisks indicate significance at the .05 level.

In Person M (SD)	Telepresence M (SD)	Test Statistics
Vertical	28.87 (16.69)	26.73 (15.88)	t(29) = .92, p =.364
Horizontal	23.63 (16.67)	14.03 (9.48)	t(29) = 4.15, p < .001*
4. General Discussion
The findings of this study support previous literature on telepresence that suggested in-person interactions result in richer communication (Olson & Olson, 2000; Rutter & Stephenson, 1979; Sellen, 1992; Short et al., 1976) and further demonstrate the value of conversational behavior as a performance measure for telepresence robots (Boudouraki et al., 2021). See Table 8 for a summary of significant findings from the (1) narrative structure, (2) pronouns, (3) interaction with objects, and (4) backchannel analyses.


Table 8. Summary of significant findings.

In-person	Telepresence
Narrative structure	More abstracts	
Interaction with objects		More objects manipulated
Pronouns	More they	More you
Interviewer backchannels	More generic (yeah)
More horizontal (yeah)	
4.1. Storytelling versus Story-Acting
One way to summarize our findings is that participants increased storytelling with an in-person interviewer but increased story-acting with a telepresent interviewer. The increase in storytelling was evidenced through the presence of more abstracts. Having an abstract focussed attention on the storytelling process. The other elements of the story structure were the same across conditions, suggesting that beyond the overarching picture, details of the stories are equally prevalent across communicative modalities.

The increase in story-acting was observed through increased object manipulation in the telepresence setting. Participants may have felt they had to act out scenes in the telepresence condition for greater clarity because their addressee was not physically present in the room. In in-person conversations, storytellers can relate what happened using minimal object representations. For example, a single marker could be a beanstalk, which the physically present interviewer with an unhindered view of the room can easily see. However, exaggerating what an object represents may be necessary if the interaction is constrained by the medium – for example, if a camera cannot clearly focus on everything in the environment, or if speakers can't tell where their addressees are looking. In that case, stacking the markers on top of one another might more clearly convey a beanstalk than a single marker, similar to how a local communicator lifted an arm up to be more visible to a telepresence communicator while the two engaged in a searching task in an office (Boudouraki et al., 2021).

The change in the use of pronouns may also result from the storytelling versus story-acting distinction. The interview participants were more likely to use you in telepresence conversations, but to use they in person. This is the opposite of our predictions; we predicted that feelings of closeness would result in more second person pronouns when in person. Instead, the choice of you may have been a deliberate attempt to overcome psychological distance to create interpersonal connection in telepresence settings. Interviewees may also have used more instances of you with the telepresence interviewer because the interviewer was disembodied, perhaps to convey that they were referring to the interviewer and not the telepresence robot, in an effort to make interviewers feel more at ease by lowering the formality of the interview (Heylighen & Dewaele, 2002; Koppen et al., 2016). They may have been used more in person to suggest a co-construction with the interviewer about the story.

4.2. Interviewer Behavior
The interviewers’ behavior was also affected by the communicative setting. Prior researchers showed that backchannels were reduced in videoconferencing (O'Conaill et al., 1993; Whittaker, 1995; Sellen 1992), and we extended that work by showing differences between different types of backchannels. We found that interviewers provided more generic backchannels and more horizontal backchannels in person, which was driven by having more yeahs in person. This accords with our initial hypothesis that there would be fewer backchannels in telepresence. People use more social chat face-to-face than over the phone (Rutter & Stephenson, 1979; Short et al., 1976). The invitation to continue to communicate, through yeah, may similarly reflect enhanced sociability during in-person communication. These findings are consistent with other work on telepresence robots identifying challenges to replicating informal social interactions (Neustaedter et al., 2018; Venolia et al., 2010; Yang et al., 2017; Takayama & Go, 2012).

We had also hypothesized that generic backchannels might be more likely in telepresence communication, but this was not the case. We had reasoned that if telepresence made interviewers less comfortable, they might want to finish that portion faster, which they could do by encouraging next turns with generic backchannels and avoiding story elaborations by withholding specific backchannels. If the interviews were viewed as onerous, more vertical backchannels might be produced in telepresence to move more quickly through the task. These hypotheses were not supported.

4.3. Limitations and Future Research
In this report, we looked at the role of conversational behaviors as a measurement of psychological distance. The way people talk to each other has long been known to reflect psychological distance, such as how close people feel to each other. For example, friends use more discourse markers such as like and you know than strangers (Jucker & Smith, 1998). Friends are also more likely to overlap each other without interrupting a turn (Dunne & Ng, 1994). And they are more likely to laugh, smile, and use other bodily movements when talking sarcastically to each other than strangers do (Caucci & Kreuz, 2012). Here, we found that conversational behavior reflected the psychological distance created by communicating with a telepresence robot: Using a telepresence robot created psychological distance that resulted in changes in how interviewers and interviewees talked. At the same time, many aspects of communication that we analyzed did not differ significantly between the robot and the face-to-face condition (see Table 8). This finding could be taken to suggest that telepresence robot-mediated communication successfully replicated face-to-face communication in our study to a considerable extent. Alternatively, it could reflect the limitations of our study design.

We analyzed dyadic communication in the context of a mock job interview in which each participant was assigned a fixed role, interviewer (experimenter) or interviewee (participant). Communication with a telepresence robot may exhibit different characteristics with different tasks, in less structured contexts, and in larger groups. Also, mediated telepresence in this study was only via the Beam telepresence robot; other devices have different communicative affordances and constraints (Tanaka, Nakanishi, et al., 2014). Moreover, the robot was mostly stationary during the interview, whereas there is evidence in the literature that interacting with a robot in motion creates additional communication challenges (Herring, 2016).

Psychological distance can be further assessed based on the number of conversational participants. Here we had two conversational participants, but experiences of psychological distance may change with a third communicator, or with the addition of several other communicators, such as in an online classroom Zoom meeting (Nadler, 2020), or when participants are distributed across multiple sites (O'Conaill et al., 1993; Olson & Olson, 2000; Sellen, 1992).

Future researchers could also add additional measurements of psychological distance, such as surveys of how personal or natural participants felt their interactions were (Oviedo & Fox Tree, 2021). Another tack would be to assess performance on a task, such as whether decreased psychological distance improves a team's abilities to complete a project, or the creativity of their work product. For example, people created more anagrams when working together via videochat than text chat (Oviedo & Fox Tree, 2021); the additional visual and auditory information in videochat may decrease the psychological distance in that medium. As another example, people contributed more novel information to a conversation when they were able to talk as opposed to text (Fox Tree & Clark, 2013).

Another direction for future work is in expansion of the communicative media assessed. We tested mobile telepresence robots, but another domain would be to investigate conversational behaviors across non-mobile telepresence, or across different types of telepresence platforms, such as Skype versus Zoom. Unlike mobile telepresence, commercial videoconferencing systems offer remote participants little control over their field of view (Lee & Takayama, 2011; O'Conaill et al., 1993; Rae et al., 2014; Sellen, 1992; Whittaker, 1995). Our results would therefore lead us to expect such videoconferencing users to make more strenuous efforts to engage their remote audience by story-acting or increased use of you pronouns.

4.4. Conclusion
The more familiar people are with a communicative method, the more comfortable they feel with the method and the better able they are to maximize the benefits of the method. For example, the more familiar people are with instant messaging, the more likely they are to communicate in ways that are similar to how they communicate in person (Fox Tree et al., 2011). Learning how grounding constraints change with new communicative devices can be challenging. As people become more used to telepresence robots, the behaviors we observed here may change. People may develop means to accommodate for the psychological distance. They may choose to make explicit things that are invisible. A person using a telepresence robot may explicitly say whether they are multitasking, and both participants may explicitly describe things in the room that are out of each other's easy view. The technology itself may also change in ways that reduce psychological distance. A telepresence robot might come equipped with wider-angle screens to display more of a telepresence communicator's body, or it might come equipped with rear-view mirrors to allow communicators using telepresence devices to more easily see behind them. These and other developments could change the way we perceive psychological distance communicating through a telepresence robot.