Organizations, such as companies and governments, created Security Operations Centers (SOCs) to defend against computer security
attacks. SOCs are central defense groups that focus on security incident management with capabilities such as monitoring, preventing,
responding, and reporting. They are one of the most critical defense
components of a modern organization’s defense.
Despite their critical importance to organizations, and the high
frequency of reported security incidents, only a few research studies focus on problems specific to SOCs. In this study, to understand
and identify the issues of SOCs, we conducted 18 semi-structured
interviews with SOC analysts and managers who work for organizations from different industry sectors. Through our analysis of
the interview data, we identified technical and non-technical issues
that exist in SOC. Moreover, we found inherent disagreements between SOC managers and their analysts that, if not addressed, could
entail a risk to SOC efficiency and effectiveness. We distill these
issues into takeaways that apply both to future academic research
and to SOC management. We believe that research should focus on
improving the efficiency and effectiveness of SOCs.
KEYWORDS
Human factors; Security Operations Center; interviews
1 INTRODUCTION
Computer security attacks are a significant threat to our society.
Organizations suffer frequent attacks by highly sophisticated and
systematic adversaries with different agendas, and these attacks, if
successful, result in severe consequences to the organizations, their
clients, and their partners.
Many organizations have created Security Operations Centers
(SOCs), generally in the form of a centralized group composed of
security specialists who monitor, prevent, report, and respond to
security attacks. While such SOCs have been shown to help improve
companies’ security posture [22, 28, 39], serious security incidents
remain rampant [40], and the current SOC setup is insufficient to
defend against these attacks.
The reasons why SOCs fail are complicated; representing a mix
of technical and human-centric issues. For example, in 2013, attackers managed to breach Target’s network and steal their data,
despite Target following “industry best practices” by deploying a
$1.6 million malware detection tool and enforcing “reasonable security controls in place” [37]. Before this incident occurred, Target’s
subsidiary SOC had successfully detected the issue and reported it
to the main SOC. However, for unknown reasons, the main SOC
did not take further action beyond the detection. As a result, the
data breach issue persisted and caused significant losses.
To improve the effectiveness and efficiency of SOCs, it is imperative for the security community to identify problems facing SOCs
and create solutions to fortify these critical components against the
ever-growing number of attacks. Unfortunately, little research has
been done to investigate the issues faced by SOCs. Previous work focused on analyst efficiency [2] and burnout [43] in SOCs, but there
is a lack of research that comprehensively studies what issues exist
in SOCs. This shortage renders the academic community unaware
of practical problems and struggles that SOCs must contend with,
leaving them ill-positioned to address these significant challenges.
In this paper, we conduct a qualitative study to discover the
issues of SOCs. In contrast to quantitative research, qualitative
research focuses on meanings, concepts definitions, characteristics,
metaphors, symbols, and descriptions of things [29], which is aligned
with our goal of studying what the issues are in current SOCs.
Session 9A: User Study CCS ’19, November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom 1955
This research is based upon a one-year study with a total of
42,895-word transcripts of interviews with security practitioners in
various SOCs. In this study, we invited 57 SOC employees—both
managers and analysts—across 46 companies to participate, and 18
of them agreed to participate in a 45-minute in-depth interview to
discuss their understanding and concern of their SOC. We audiorecorded, transcribed, anonymized, and analyzed all the interviews
by applying the iterative open coding approach [42].
We analyze the issues that analysts and managers reported and,
interestingly, found both agreements and contradictions among
them. In our analysis, we highlight the research problems that the
academic community should address to benefit SOCs in dealing
with real-world security threats. Based on the study, we have key
findings as follows:
Low visibility into the network infrastructure and endpoints is the most common issue in SOCs. Among all of the
issues that SOC operators identified (Section 2), low visibility into
the network infrastructure and endpoints is the most acknowledged issue that prevents SOCs from being effective. The participants reported that low visibility is their biggest concern in security
operations (Section 4.1.1).
Phishing attacks are the most common attacks faced by
SOCs, yet current phishing defense training provides little
help in resolving the issue. In the interviews, 15 out of 18 participants mentioned that phishing the attack experienced most often.
One possible way to prevent phishing attacks is to educate employees to be alert of suspicious emails. However, we found that such
education is not as effective as we expect in practice. In particular,
one participant mentioned his experience where a severe phishing
attack took place on an employee within 30 days after the phishing
defense training (Section 4.1.2).
False positives in malicious activity detection do not majorly impact SOC operations. Five interviewees reflected their
significant concerns regarding having a large volume of unfiltered,
unrelated, and uncorrelated alert data (Section 4.1.3). Moreover,
reports and logs that are automatically generated by SOC systems
may contain inaccurate or ambiguous information, which affects
SOC performance (Section 4.1.4). However, none of the interviewees consider false positives in automatic malicious activity detection as a major issue in SOC operations, which is in opposition to
academia’s belief that false positives are fatal in automatic detection
(Section 4.1.5).
Current SOC performance evaluation metrics are ineffective in measuring SOC success. Current quantitative metrics,
such as the number of incidents and average response time, are not
effective in measuring SOC success because each security event
has unique severity and consequences (Section 4.2.2).
Speed of response and level of automation, evaluation metrics, and tool functionality are the top three controversial issues between analysts and managers. Through our qualitative
analysis of our interview data, we discovered inherent disagreements between managers and analysts regarding issues facing their
SOC (Section 4.2). Analysts and managers have conflicted and mismatched perspectives toward these issues.
Based on our findings, we provide actionable advice for SOC professionals to help them improve the effectiveness and efficiency of
their organization’s SOC. Furthermore, we derive research opportunities for the academic research community to help them recognize
the real-world concerns and needs of SOCs.
2 BACKGROUND
A Security Operations Center (SOC) is a group dedicated to preventing, detecting, and responding to the security incidents in an
organization. In contrast to Network Operation Centers that operate and maintain the network equipment, or physical security
departments that are responsible for physical surveillance and security of organizations, a SOC is responsible for monitoring, assessing,
and defending an organization’s computing environment by using a collection of tools, technologies, and processes. A SOC may
have a different name, such as Cyber Security Operations Center
(CSOC), Computer Security Incident Response Team (CSIRT), and
Information Security Operations Center (ISOC) [55]. In this paper,
we will refer to all such defense groups as SOCs.
Managers and analysts within a SOC collaborate to mitigate
the security threats in an organization. An organization typically
consists of networks, servers, databases, websites, applications, and
endpoints. A SOC analyzes activity over all the different units in
the organizational architecture to identify compromises.
Organization Resources. In this study, we consider two types
of SOCs: internal and outsourced. An internal SOC is part of the
organization they defend: it is operated and managed internally by
the organization. An outsourced SOC is an independent party which
an organization pays for SOC services. These SOCs are operated
and managed by an independent party, and typically report to a
designated entity who is a member of their client’s organization.
Human Hierarchy. One of the major tasks of a SOC is to consume
and analyze incident-relevant data. These incidents are events observed on the company network and its endpoints, which may
require further actions. A SOC collects, analyzes, and stores very
large volumes of data daily from logging mechanisms. For instance,
intrusion detection systems, which generate logs, are placed on the
network to capture potentially malicious activities and to provide
information regarding that activity to SOC analysts. SOCs dedicate a group of individuals that perform real-time triage of these
received alerts, logs, and events on their network.
This group of system analysts is called Tier 1. Some of the additional responsibilities of Tier 1 analysts include real-time monitoring and configuring system tools. They perform the initial investigation of the incident, and if the incident is out of the scope of
their responsibility or if their skill-set is not enough to investigate
that incident, they escalate it to the next tier (the Tier 2 analysts).
The Tier 2 analysts perform an in-depth analysis of the incident.
They review the Tier 1 analyst’s reports to identify affected systems
and the scope of the attack. Based on the collected evidence, Tier 2
analysts take actions such as blocking an activity, deactivating an
account, watching the network for further evidence, or escalating
the case to a higher-tier.
In general, as the tier level increases, the responsibilities of the
analysts become more specific. Moreover, the time expectancy of
solving incidents of each tier tends to differ, where analysts from a
lower-tier are expected to resolve incidents faster than a higher-tier,
as incidents that escalate are more complex.
Session 9A: User Study CCS ’19, November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom 1956
• Threat assessment
• Vulnerability
assessment
• Penetration testing
• System assessment
Tier 2
Incident
Responder
• Incident analysis
• Incident response
• Malware analysis
• Scanning affected
systems
Tier 1
Triage
Specialist
• Realtime triage
• Realtime monitoring
• Vulnerability scanning
• Configuring system
tools
E
S
C
A
L
A
T
I
O
N
S
K
I
L
L
S
E
T
Tier 3+
Threat
Analysis
Figure 1: Typical SOC analyst tier responsibilities [55].
In large organizations, there may be other tiers that perform
tasks such as threat hunting, vulnerability assessment, and penetration testing. Broadly, these tier layers are called Tier 3+. A graphical
representation of the tiers with their responsibilities is shown in
Figure 1. It is important to note that not all SOC have such a hierarchical structure. In non-hierarchical arrangements, all employees
are expected to have similar skill-sets which makes them capable
of handling incidents individually.
3 METHODOLOGY
We conducted 18 semi-structured interviews with SOC analysts
and managers from six different industry sectors: airline, construction, education, financial services, information technology, and
professional services. The interview questions cover topics such
as the SOC types, the hierarchical structures, the technical and
managerial operations, and the evaluation metrics. For the details
of the interview questions, please refer to Appendix A. To have
exhaustive results, we did not stop conducting interviews until new
themes stopped emerging from the iterative open coding procedure
performed on the transcribed interviews [17].
Our study was exempted by our Institutional Review Board (IRB),
as our questions did not measure individual behaviors. Despite this,
we still followed the same ethics and privacy requirements that an
IRB would normally enforce. When we transcribed the interviews,
we anonymized the participant’s name, the organization’s name,
and all personally identifiable information. The audio records of
the interviews are kept encrypted.
Participant Recruitment. We recruited participants in two steps.
In the first step, we contacted SOC-related individuals from various industry sectors through multiple vectors including searching
profiles on LinkedIn, attending online security related business webinars, attending industry security events and conferences across
the U.S., and asking known contacts. We sent each of these individuals an email with details about our research study, interview
procedure, the motivation behind the research study, information
regarding the data anonymization process, and potential benefits to
the participants and their organizations. Unfortunately, only those
in our known contact list replied to our request, and some of them
agreed to participate. Throughout our search for potential participants, we recruited ten of our participants through emails and two
of our participants at industry security events and conferences.
Participant ID Position Organization Resources
P1 Analyst Internal
P2 Manager Internal
P3 Analyst Internal
P4 Analyst Internal
P5 Manager Outsourced
P6 Analyst Outsourced
P7 Analyst Internal
P8 Manager Internal
P9 Analyst Internal
P10 Manager Internal
P11 Manager Internal
P12 Analyst Internal
P13 Manager Internal
P14 Manager Internal
P15 Manager Internal
P16 Manager Outsourced
P17 Analyst Outsourced
P18 Manager Outsourced
Table 1: Participants in our research study.
In the second step, to recruit the corresponding SOC manager/-
analyst from the same organization, we used the Snowball Sampling
technique, which is used to recruit future subjects by referrals from
existing subjects [6]. We asked each participant to ask if their manager or their analyst would be interested in participating in our
research study. In this way, we recruited an additional six participants.
As shown in Table 1, we recruited 5 participants who work in
an outsourced SOC and 13 participants who work in internal SOCs.
Due to ethical considerations, we do not provide any identifiers that
would potentially reveal manager/analyst pairs who work in the
same organization, including their corresponding industry sectors.
Interview Question Design. Our interviews included questions
that were specific to roles. On specific topics, we designed questions
that were only asked to managers. We selected these topics by
considering role-specific authorizations and responsibilities. For
example, we asked questions about integrating new technologies
to managers because, typically, a manager can decide to add new
technology to the SOC. Similarly, SOC budget is typically controlled
by an entity who is situated either the equivalent of or higher than a
manager in the organizational hierarchy. Because of this reason, we
asked questions that are related to budget to managers. Regarding
automation, we designed questions for analysts. We wanted to
understand if analysts were allowed to automate their systems and
their opinion on automation.
At the start of each interview, the interviewer mentioned that all
questions were optional, and participants were free not to respond
to any of them. It is worth noting that the interviewer did not ask
questions in the order they appear in the Appendix A; the discussion
flow with the participant determined the order of the questions and
the interviewer had discretion to follow leads [4].
Data Analysis. We adopted the iterative open coding procedure [42]
to analyze our interview data thoroughly. Two independent coders
coded all interviews to ensure unbiased results. The primary researcher conducted and transcribed the interviews.
After finalizing the interviews and the transcriptions, the primary researcher created a codebook by coding the transcripts. Once
the codebook was complete, the second coder joined the research
Session 9A: User Study CCS ’19, November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom 1957
0 10 20 30 40
Percentage
Overloaded and Low Quality Threat Intelligence
High False Positives Rate
Poor Usability of SOC Systems
Low Visibility on Devices and Network Topology
Inferior Defense Against Specific Types of Attacks
Poor Quality of Reports and Logs
Insufficient Analyst Training
Low Situational Awareness
Tool Functionality
Evaluation Metrics
Speed of Response and Level of Automation
Figure 2: Issues identified through our qualitative interviews that had significant disagreement between analysts
and managers. The percentage gap (x-axis) is the percentage
of disagreement between analysts and managers (higher indicated higher disagreement). Issues are sorted based on size
of percentage disagreement.
study. Both coders had similar backgrounds, with only the primary researcher having previous SOC knowledge. The primary
researcher guided the second coder, in concepts of qualitative research studies and related methodologies, techniques for coding
interviews, and SOC knowledge.
After the coding procedure, we calculated the Cohen’s Kappa
coefficient as a representative of inter-coder reliability score. The
Cohen’s Kappa coefficient for this study is 0.71, which Landis et
al. [30] stated as a substantial score of agreement for categorical
data.
4 SOC ISSUES
In this section, we discuss SOC issues that we uncovered from the
interviews. Recall from Section 3 that questions such as budget
plan and technique deployment strategy are manager-only due to
the scope of work. For the issues from the questions answered by
both analysts and managers, we calculate the respective ratiosof
the participants agree with the issue, and we compare the ratios
between analysts and managers, as shown in Table 2. We also sort
the issues by the difference of the agreement between analysts
and managers. Based on the sorted results, shown in Figure 2, we
observe a gap in the analyst-manager difference of agreement: while
most of the issues are under 20% difference, three of them are around
30% or above. In this paper, we call the issues with less than 20%
difference the matched issues, whereas the ones with greater than
30% difference the mismatched issues. We will introduce the two
types of issues separately, followed by the other issues identified
by manager-only or interviewee-specific questions.
4.1 Matched Issues
Here, we discuss the issues that our participants have the most
agreement. We selected them by observing the gap in the analystmanager difference of agreement, shown in Figure 2.
4.1.1 Low Visibility on Devices and Network Topology
The lack of network visibility is the most common issue in our
participant’s SOCs: 71.43% of analysts and 60% of the managers,
including both outsourced and internal SOCs, raised the concern
that they were not able to learn the complete network setup and
thus cannot enforce security operations effectively.
Network information helps a SOC to understand an organization’s security posture and respond to security incidents. The information is of different types, such as “network architecture documentation,” “list of devices in network zone models” (P18), “full
asset inventory,” and “configuration management database” (P5).
For example, P18 stated that the situational awareness (SA) (Section 4.1.7) is impacted by the level of visibility:
In terms of the clients that we have on board, our situational
awareness is confined to the devices that are on board. We had
several cases that they were sending alerts from devices that
we never agreed to receive events from.
In addition, P5 highlighted the impact of the incompleteness of
network visibility on response speed:
We do not have a full asset inventory, that is a big constraint
(for fast response). We do not have configuration management
database, that is a big constraint (for fast response).
The reason for incomplete network visibility is multi-faceted. Internally, the issue may be due to the structural setup of SOCs. For
example, a tiered SOC with a hierarchical setup that is assigned
limited visibility of incidents and machines to analysts at different
tiers, described by P3:
SOCs that are tiered will have limited visibility based on its
tier because a SOC analyst can accidentally make a mistake
during escalation.
Externally, incompleteness may be caused by the improper management or operation from another department. In specific, P18
mentioned the lack of information maintenance and the lack of the
communication between IT operations and security teams:
(The information the SOC requests) is not always up to date. [...]
(The SOC’s receiving alerts from unknown devices) is usually
because the IT ops and security teams are not necessarily the
same people and messages get lost and things like that.
P7 stated that visibility is impacted because of the administrators
breaking organizational rules. In this case, the SOC monitors a
large network that is connected to smaller sub-networks controlled
by different administrators, and P7 observed scenarios where administrators decide not to follow pre-determined organizational
guidelines in creating their infrastructure or do not report new
devices that they connect to the network, which negatively impacts
the overall visibility of the SOC.
P4 also complained about the company employees’ disobeying
the rules:
The company as a whole push for stronger device management
and identification but it is a very difficult thing at a global
scale. Sometimes, somebody does not necessarily bound to the
same standards so they will just throw some routers to get the
networks working.
Also, the incompleteness is due to the nature of the organization,
which requires flexibility of device connectivity. For example, P∗1
works for a particular sector with special requirements which makes
it impossible to have high visibility all the time, given the fact that
1Our study includes a limited number of industry sectors, and this quote contains one of those
sectors. Therefore, we anonymized our participant’s ID to protect their identity against the possibility of de-anonymization.
Session 9A: User Study CCS ’19, November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom 1958
Category Subcategory Analysts Managers
Operational Issues
Low Visibility on Devices and Network Topology 71.43 60.00
Inferior Defense Against Specific Types of Attacks 42.86 55.56
Slow Response Speed of the SOC 20.00 50.00
Inefficient Evaluation Metrics 50.00 10.00
Insufficient Budget — 44.44
Technological Issues
Overloaded and Low Quality Threat Intelligence 25.00 30.00
Poor Quality of Reports and Logs 37.50 22.22
High False Positives Rate 12.50 20.00
Malfunctioning of SOC Tools 37.50 66.67
Insufficient Automation Level of SOC Components 33.33 77.78
Poor Usability of SOC Systems 33.33 44.44
Challenge of Scaling SOC Technologies — 30.00
Human Knowledge Issues Low Situational Awareness 0.00 20.00
Insufficient Analyst Training 37.50 20.00
Table 2: Heatmap of the percentage of SOC managers and analysts that indicated a specific issue in their interviews. We calculated respective ratios based on the total number of participants that answered each of our interview questions. This number
varies for each category because all interviews were semi-structured. Analyst percentages for issue categories Insufficient Budget and Scaling of SOC are indicated with “—” because questions related to those topics were asked only to our SOC manager
participants.
many personal devices will be actively connected to the network
at any time:
Given the fact that this is a university, the expectation is that
each student brings at least four of their own devices to every
class. Then you start bringing in the professors and various
departments who want their own PCs and researchers who are
running high compute performance clusters under their desks.
So, there is not a possible way to list all these machines.
To mitigate the incomplete network visibility issue, avoidable or unavoidable, the participants talked about the solutions that have been
working effectively or will potentially work. P∗1
, the participant
who works for the university with specific requirements on flexible
device connections, stated that incomplete visibility had “not been
a problem” for them due to effective tracking of all information
through their SIEM (Security Information and Event Management),
by having authentication clusters, and by actively watching packages. When an incident happens, they look for the person who was
authenticated to that machine instead of the machine itself. Also,
P4 considered that the visibility problem would be mitigated “if
they had a system that would notify them when new machines are
introduced on the network.”
4.1.2 Inferior Defense Against Specific Types of Attacks
In our interview, we asked our participants about the attacks that
they previously encountered from the aspects of victim specification,
attacker specification, and attack types. We also asked them about
the most challenging attack that they experienced while working
at SOCs.
Victim specialty. We categorized attacks as general attacks, industry-specific attacks, and organization-specific attacks, which
are attacks targeting the general public, the specific industry sector,
and the specific organization, respectively. We asked the interviewees about their experiences on each type of attack. Among all the
participants, fifteen participants stated that they mostly encounter
the general and basic kind of attacks that are not tailored, especially for an industry or an organization. Ten of our participants
stated that they experience industry-specific attacks on occasion,
such as tailored phishing attacks exclusively for a particular sector.
Eight participants stated that they experience organization-specific
attacks in which an attacker targets a specific organization with a
clearly defined goal in mind, such as compromising confidential
data that is only kept within a particular organization.
Attacker specification. We classified attackers into individual
attacks and nation-state sponsored attacks, and we asked the interviewees to compare the difficulty of defending against both attacks.
According to nine participants, attacks that are the most difficult to
defend against are nation-state sponsored attacks. One of the stated
reasons was the nature of these attacks: participants argued that
these attackers have bountiful resources, even more than the SOC.
Participants also pointed out that these types of attackers have adequate time for the reconnaissance phase and find the best strategy
to attack their target network. Regarding nation-state sponsored
attacks, P16 said:
I think a lot of foreign adversaries are hard. We see traffic
coming from another country, another nation and we are able
to quickly block that traffic. But, these foreign adversaries,
they buy different domain names, different IP spaces. It is very
difficult to fully block that particular person ahead of time. So,
you are constantly trying to defend against someone that is
what I would consider a moving target.
The participant suggested that a SOC should provide proactive
monitoring and a powerful incident response team that has access
to high-quality threat intelligence to defend against such attackers.
Attack Types. We divided attacks into remote exploits, phishing,
denial of service, and so on, and we asked the interviewees the
experience of defending against each type of attack. Phishing is the
most common attack mentioned by fifteen participants. Except for
Session 9A: User Study CCS ’19, November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom 1959
P8, our participant chose not to share further information regarding
the attacks that they previously encountered given the confidential
nature of those details.
The reason for phishing being the most common attacks mostly
varies; however, three participants (P2, P9, and P12) from the same
section vector similarly stated that they receive more phishing
attempts because their industry sector is more prone to phishing
attacks. Specifically, P∗1 gave an example and said:
From an airline standpoint, we see that our company is spoofed,
and it looked like a web check-in but with malware.
Furthermore, we asked the interviewees about solutions for phishing attacks. P6 mentioned “using tools that can prevent phishing
emails” before they reach their mail server. Two of our participants
(P7 and P10), stated that proper training is the “only way” to prevent phishing attacks. Regarding a previous successful phishing
attempt, P8 provided details of such an incident that had severe
consequences in which the employee was trained specifically for
phishing in the last 30 days:
A secretary to a researcher was attacked. It was a very wellcrafted phishing attack, and the machine got compromised.
Based on the information in the mailbox and the system, they
were able to pivot and able to hack into the mail server. From
there, the attacker was able to monitor the actions that were
taken against them and move internally on the network.
The participant stated that attackers had sent emails on the researcher’s behalf to the organization that recognizes the researcher
as a trusted source.
Besides phishing attacks, another participant, P13, mentioned
Distributed Denial of Service (DDOS) as a difficult and disruptive
type of attack, which is used to impact the availability of a service
by utilizing multiple hijacked machines, thus hindering legitimate
users from using that service [34].
4.1.3 Overloaded and Low-quality Threat Intelligence
Threat Intelligence (TI) is a collection of information regarding
security threats [31]. Organizations subscribe to open source and
commercial threat intelligence feeds to benefit from such information. Besides, they maintain teams that are dedicated to searching
for emerging threats. For SOCs, high-quality TI is paramount in
detecting and preventing incidents.
Eleven participants stated that the threat intelligence that they
collect from both open-source and commercial feeds is high-quality
and useful. However, five participants stated that some feeds provide very large volumes of information, and they are flooded with
uncorrelated, industry unrelated, and low-quality data. Regarding
the usefulness of their TI, P12 was concerned and said:
A lot of our TI is coming from vendors, and our vendors are not
the best producing TI. There is not a lot of contextual data in
there, which makes them pretty much useless for us. However,
sometimes, they prove to be useful, but not every time.
The interviewer asked P10 if they carefully examine all their threat
intelligence feeds, and the participant said:
We cannot, it is too much. It was 17 terabytes two months
ago, and now it is 20 terabytes. It gets to the point that it is
information overload. We are working toward filtering half of
the TI that we collect.
Almost half of our participants (P1, P5, P6, P11, P12, P13, and P15)
reported having dedicated TI teams.
4.1.4 Poor Quality Reports and Logs
SOC systems continuously generate reports and logs for many
purposes including, but not limited to, informing an analyst of
an incident, monitoring the performance of a particular device,
monitoring the false positive rate of a tool, or auditing the status
of the metric collection. Generating these reports and logs is one
of the major and critical daily activity of a SOC.
Twelve participants stated that they are satisfied with their reports and logs; however, five participants had concerns regarding
their reports.
P12 was concerned about the lack of context in their reports and
said:
Reports generated are ambiguous. It is very difficult to add
meaning to them. We should add more context to our reports.
P9 stated that it is difficult to add meaning to the reports and logs
and sometimes they do not contain enough context, and therefore
are unactionable. The participant said:
There may be a lot of data which is also interesting data but
maybe not entirely what I need, or it may not give any context
to the information which is presented. It takes a lot of time
trying to determine how the data fit the alert’s context in terms
of the infrastructure.
The most commonly mentioned mitigation by our participants
was constant tuning, which is adjusting reports to a better, more
optimal state. Three of the participants (P2, P3, and P4), added that
tuning is more accurate, faster, and more efficient if the organization
develops and uses homegrown tools as this gives them the ability
to customize those tools and reports before deployment in the SOC.
Moreover, if tuning is necessary after these tools are deployed, the
process is faster as the engineers who developed the tools can act
on tuning requests faster, as compared to requesting a vendor to
make changes. Aside from developing homegrown tools, P4 stated
that in their SOC, they have a team dedicated for constant tuning
of their reports and logs.
Although P12 mentioned that reports generated by their SOC
systems are ambiguous and require improvements, P12’s manager
thinks that their reporting and logging mechanisms are in perfect
condition.
P9 is another analyst participant who disagrees with their manager on this matter. Although their manager thinks that their reports are fine, P9 reported that they are sometimes not actionable.
The participant stated that reports do have a lot of interesting information; however, at the same time, they do not have the information
that they require for a particular type of incident. As a result, the
participant stated that they waste a lot of time researching how the
information fits the infrastructure.
4.1.5 High False Positive Rate
When SOC systems classify and indicate a legitimate activity as a
malicious one, it is called a false positive.
Fifteen participants stated that false positives are not a major
issue for their SOC systems.
Session 9A: User Study CCS ’19, November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom 1960
Common reasons for having high false positive rates include having low visibility across the board, low SOC maturity, and employee
mistakes. Regarding employee mistakes, P11 said:
Sometimes, employees do something that they should not in
the organization. That is the time when we see false positive
ratio go up.
All the participants manually tune false positives: correcting alerts
one by one when they encounter false positives. Regarding tuning,
P15 said:
We are pretty good at figuring false positives out and fixing
them. We call it tuning. We have a pretty good cycle for tuning.
However, P11 stated that the level of tuning is a trade-off, as too
much tuning would cause the systems to miss real incidents. The
participant said:
False positives are always a balancing act. You can tune out
false positives, but you have to be very careful how you do it. If
you want, I can eliminate 100% false positives, but I am going
to miss some of the true positives.
4.1.6 Poor Usability of SOC Systems
A SOC can be populated with excellent and top-notch tools and
technologies; however; if those tools are extremely difficult to master and use, they will never be fully used. In that case, the SOC
analysts would struggle with the tool instead of focusing on the
incident.
Nine participants gave high ratings to the usability of their SOC
systems and tools. The consensus among them was that usability varies by each tool however, overall, it has not been a major
problem.
Participants P2, P12, and P16 reported some concerns.
P2 thinks that if a SOC employee must master many tools at the
same time, and if the SOC team is newly formed, the usability level
decreases. When the interviewer asked about the level of usability
in their SOC, the participant stated that their maturity is increasing
over time and usability increases along with it. The participant said:
I would put that as a four out of five, it is a very large array of
tools that we have and given the maturity. However, the tools
that we are using in our daily operations are okay. I would say
three out of five a couple of months ago, but now, it is a four.
P16, who manages an outsourced SOC, stated that, in some cases,
clients request that they use a tool that does not have the ideal
usability level that they would normally prefer.
P12 argued that usability depends on user education. P12 said:
It all depends on user education. If a team has to work on a
particular tool, they are fully educated by the team members,
and if it is required, the vendor is brought in to train them.
Regarding usability, we observed from our results that all participant SOCs lack a shared interface that groups all their tools in one
location. When the interviewer asked P3 about such an interface,
P3 said:
That would be a dream come true situation.
4.1.7 Low Situational Awareness
A high level of Situational Awareness (SA) requires adequate knowledge of the environment and the organization’s mission to improve
decision-making capabilities [13]. In the context of a SOC, the degree of SA depends on certain criteria, such as the level of employee
awareness of the organization’s mission, their responsibilities, and
their knowledge of the types of attacks and adversaries that the
organization may face.
Sixteen participants reported that they have high SA; however,
some mentioned that there are still some factors that either make
maintaining high SA difficult or decrease SA.
According to P2, the size of their network has an impact on SA.
Regarding this, the participant said:
The size of the network, interconnections, the overall interactions with other teams. So, it is never going to be 100%.
Similarly, when the interviewer asked about their level of SA, P8
stated that their SOC monitors many other organizations and added:
I would say that we are understanding the majority of the
things that we see but due to the fact that there are many
organizations that we are monitoring that is an ever amount
of change with those organizations.
Two of our manager participants who manage outsourced SOCs
(P5 and P18), stated that they would rate their SA as poor due to not
having enough visibility, for the reasons discussed in Section 4.1.1.
4.1.8 Insufficient Analyst Training
In all our participants’ SOCs, either internal or commercial training,
is provided to employees. Internal training methods include handson experiences through simulation platforms, senior employees
educating juniors, junior employees shadowing seniors, security
lectures, and tool training. Commercial training methods include
training programs that are offered by vendors, security certification
programs, and tool training packages that are purchased from the
vendors along with the related tool.
Two of our participants (P3 and P11), expressed that they do
not believe their training programs to be effective. When the interviewer asked P3 about how they would change their current
training methods, the participant responded:
I would love to change them because the old ones are not working. This is for the majority of the companies; otherwise, phishing campaigns would not be successful; ransomware would not
pass through.
P9, who is a SOC analyst, expressed their disappointment that their
organization does not provide any commercial training programs.
The participant stated that their organization only provides informal internal training and added that they would prefer formal
training that is offered by an external vendor.
P5 stated their concern regarding the importance of tool training
and said:
One of the biggest issues that I see, most organizations, they
buy the new technology, but they do not buy the training.
[...] These days tools tend to be extremely complex. [...] Most
products are not easy to use and require training.
4.2 Mismatched Issues
Here, we describe the issues discussed by our participants where
they have the least agreement. We selected these issues by observing
the gap between the analyst–manager difference in agreement,
shown in Figure 2.
Session 9A: User Study CCS ’19, November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom 1961
4.2.1 Speed of Response and Level of Automation
Three out of five participants who work in an outsourced SOC
reported factors that negatively affect their response speed.
P17, who is an analyst in an outsourced SOC, stated that their response speed relies on client’s capabilities because, per the provider/-
client agreement, they are responsible for only detecting an incident
and their client is supposed to respond. When asked about if they
could rate their SOC response speed, P17 said:
We do not do the final actions to remediate so we cannot be
very fast. It depends on the customer’s capabilities for the final
resolution to be made. Our first response is fast, but depending
on the customer overall, it can be slow.
P16, who manages an outsourced SOC, was concerned about not
having enough staff and rated their speed four out of five. P16 said:
We are not fully staffed. If we had that staff, I would give it a
five.
P5, who manages an outsourced SOC, stated that visibility is paramount for quick response speed and it tends to be slow because of
issues such as potential restrictions in the provider/client agreement
or the client’s inability to report a full inventory list (Section 4.1.1).
Compared to outsourced SOCs, the ratio of our participants that
indicated issues regarding response speed was lower.
We observed that ten out of thirteen participants who work in
internal SOCs reported fast response speed without any issues. The
other three participants, P2, P11, and P15, also rated their SOC
response speed as fast; however, they each provided a reason which
affects their response speed negatively.
According to P2, low maturity is the reason for having speed
issues. Specifically, when the interviewer asked P2 if they could
rate their response speed, the participant responded:
I would give a four out of five. Maturity is the reason. Incident
response is serious so that they have to coordinate between
different departments outside of security. Legal and corporate
communications. The house-in procedures are relatively new.
P15 was concerned about their response speed against new attacks.
P15 said:
We are pretty good, but there are other things if it is a new type
of thing, we are not as good as we should be if it is malware,
phishing, like standard attacks we are great but if it is new, we
are having problems making sense out of it.
To improve the speed of response, managers consider automation
as an effective and critical approach. P11, who is a manager in an
internal SOC, stated that they are not satisfied with the current
speed of their SOC and said:
No, I am never happy. We are measuring the mean time to
mitigate an attack, and we count the priority and severity of
the attack, 4 being the least prioritized. In order to mitigate a
P0 we have 30 minutes, P1 60 minutes, P2 120 minutes, P3 24
hours, P4 48 hours. Our current success is %87, which is good,
but I am not happy.
The interviewer followed up with a question to inquire about a
solution for better speed and asked:
What is the solution to increasing that percentage?
The participant replied:
Automation.
Seven of our manager participants stated that they always want
more automation. When the interviewer asked P5 if they need more
automation, the participant said:
I always need more automation.
However, P4, an analyst participant, criticized this point of view
and said:
So, automation is not a Catch-22 type of a problem where it is
becoming a buzzword for vendors, and unfortunately, we have
a lot of management that sees this more important than the
work itself, but not realizing that they are getting less quality.
Nevertheless, another analyst participant, P7, from another perspective, expressed their satisfaction for automating the metric
collection, by stating:
Well, every morning, we have to go through all 20 clients and
manually get the metrics from them. Before I had to do all
of them manually, now they are done in a couple of minutes
instead of an hour.
Lastly, during our interviews, another issue that surfaced was the
trustworthiness of automation. When asked if they fully trust their
automation, P16 responded:
So, we do have regular checks for those systems to make sure
that they are working correctly and functioning correctly.
One of our analyst participants, P6, also argued that automation
should not be fully trusted. When asked about the reason, the
participant said:
Yes, because of false positives.
4.2.2 Evaluation Metrics
Organizations use metrics to understand if their SOC is performing
as intended. Furthermore, these metrics also help to shape plans
and identify current problems.
Metrics are of two types: quantitative and qualitative. While
quantitative metrics are used for data, such as the number of incidents or the average time of detection, qualitative metrics are used
to measure the quality instead of quantity, such as the severity level
of an incident.
All of our manager participants stated that they use both qualitative and quantitative metrics, with quantitative being more dominant. Quantitative metrics that our participants mentioned include:
number of incidents, number of vulnerabilities discovered, number of tickets per analyst, time of ticket creation, elapsed time of
resolution, elapsed time of remediation, elapsed time of mitigation, number of total tickets that are created and resolved, mean
detection time, mean response time, mean time of incident closure,
time taken to react to an incident, number of incidents that are not
closed, and number of known attacks prevented.
Regarding qualitative metrics, our participants mentioned only
incident severity level and vulnerability severity level.
Although quantitative metrics are dominantly used by our manager participants, some of them consider these metrics inaccurate
and ineffective.
When asked about bad practices regarding metrics that are used
in SOCs, P14 responded:
The metrics that just show you numbers instead of the impact are generally not so effective. Because numbers do not
necessarily tell you anything.
Session 9A: User Study CCS ’19, November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom 1962
P15 stated that their SOC is only responsible for detection and, after
they detect incidents, they hand those cases to other teams and
wait for their completion, which renders some metrics inaccurate.
Analysts consider quantitative metrics that are used by their
managers ineffective. Furthermore, they consider these metrics as
just a tool that their managers use to show false improvement.
When asked if they think that the metrics that are used in their
SOC are effective or not, P12 said:
Not necessarily, because they do not always show the true
effectiveness of a SOC because it is very difficult to measure.
P4 expressed an extreme disapproval toward quantitative metrics.
The participant said:
A useless metric can be the number of events because generally,
people will not take into account false positive numbers (that
are included to the number of events) [...] I think the reason is
that the lack of understanding of security of the upper-class
management as well as, it is a way to make it seem like your
SOC is improving.
4.2.3 Tool Functionality
A SOC is composed of teams that use those tools to investigate
incidents. Some of these tools, such as Security Information and
Event Management systems (SIEM), which are typically used as a
major tool for managing incidents and consuming logs, are vital for
SOC operations. The responsibility for these sets of tools change.
Analysts can be responsible for a few sets of tools, whereas their
managers are responsible for the whole set of tools in the SOC,
including critical tools such as SIEM.
P13, who is a manager, stated that they did not have many cases
during the time that they were the manager of the SOC; however,
they provided a case in which their SIEM malfunctioned. The participant said:
I cannot say we had many but one case we had an issue with
a SIEM malfunctioning for a little while, it took a week for the
vendor to fix it.
Another area of the SOC in which managers are responsible is the
scaling and integration of new tools. Managers are also responsible for legacy tools and their effects on the SOC. P15, who is the
manager, stated their concerns about a legacy tool and said:
Every once in a while we are having problems with tools, we
are having one right now, we have a legacy tool for a SOC, it is
showing its age, we are trying to migrate out of it, but it takes
time [...] SOC cannot do its job while it is down, but we have
backup systems in place.
Backup systems act as a fail-safe in SOCs in case of a malfunction.
Two of our manager participants, P14 and P18, discussed these
mechanisms.
P14 discussed their fail-safe mechanisms in their SOC and said:
Yeah, we experienced malfunctions, we have fail-safe mechanisms though we can always roll back and fix things.
Similarly, P18 stated that they did not have any malfunctioning
case before and gave the reason as:
We actually got a quite redundant architecture in terms of
high availability failover and my experience I haven’t seen
anything like that.
SOC managers can also control various teams that belong to or
work with the SOC. They can assign teams for such cases and
mitigate the problem. Our manager participant, P16, stated that
their engineering team takes care of such issues and said:
You will have issues with tools all the time and that’s where
engineers are involved to make sure that these issues are taken
care of quickly so we are able to keep those systems up and
running, you always have that possibility to have tool issues.
Unlike their managers, our analyst participants do not think that
tool functionality is a problem in their SOC. Three out of eight of
our analyst participants indicated not having a tool functionality
issue.
P4, who is an analyst in a non-tiered SOC, considers tool functionality issues insignificant for their SOC. The participant stated
that manual work should always make up for those functionality
problems. P4 said:
If there is a situation that a tool-set does not work, we always
are to do it manually. If anyone in our group does not have
that capability, we train them.
Maturity is another obstacle regarding tool functionality. If the
SOC is young or the SOC team is young, analysts could have issues
utilizing the full potential of tools.
P7, our analyst participant who works in a tiered SOC, stated the
fact that low maturity could affect them, but did not, and highlighted
that their tools do not have any functionality issues. P7 said:
We are still young, but the tools that we used worked for us.
4.3 Other Issues
In our study, we designed manager-specific and analyst-specific
questions due to the different scopes of work. Also, the interviewer
asked the participants if they have any other problems with their
organization’s SOC that was not inquired in the prior questions.
We grouped their responses in Table 3, and we present other issues
that we found as follows.
4.3.1 Lack of a Communication Channel Between Managers
and Analysts
Proper communication channels between managers and their analysts are an effective way for analysts to report such cases to
their managers. P2, our analyst participant, reported that they have
issues regarding their Threat Intelligence (TI) systems; however,
their manager disagreed with them stating no issues with their
TI systems. As a follow-up, the interviewer asked their opinion
on how to eliminate this problem, and the participant stated that
they do not have a way to suggest any improvement ideas to their
supervisors.
If you had the opportunity to talk to your manager about this
(TI issue), what would you tell them?
The participant replied:
We can give some feedback on why it would be helpful to use
the data. Right now, we may only use the data to kind of look
back at and make correlations on versus actually leveraging
the data and action. So that would probably be some of the
biggest recommendation that we (as analysts) can make is
actually using the data, using it to make actions versus using
it as a reference point.
Session 9A: User Study CCS ’19, November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom 1963
Participant ID Participant’s Response
P1 The constant challenge of defending against ever-changing attacks and adversaries.
P2 Having low SOC maturity.
P3 Need of phasing out from tiered structures.
Inadequate training.
P4
Good and skilled people not getting jobs because of not having cybersecurity certifications.
Management having a good education but no vision or enthusiasm.
Cybersecurity certifications preferred over competence.
Following guidelines and blueprints blindly.
Utilizing wrong types of metrics.
P5 Analysts’ constant need for something new due to the repetition of tasks and tools.
Lack of motivation of analysts.
P6
Communication and collaboration problems among teams responsible for protecting the organization’s network and assets.
Challenge in protecting endpoints, network, and network devices properly, which is sometimes not under SOC’s control.
Getting everyone to see from SOC’s perspective.
Need for defense in-depth structure.
P8 Political problems among constituencies and groups of the organization.
Challenge in getting trust through the organization.
P9
Not getting the right and necessary data from SOC systems.
SOC analysts not focusing on the right direction.
Not prioritizing events based on severity.
Not leveraging more automation.
P10 Burnout among analysts.
P11 Inconsistent capability and maturity levels among SOC teams and technologies.
P14
Careless efforts and investments to stay cutting edge as a part of the marketing competition.
The constant need for catching up with technology.
Getting the right tools and training.
Having access to the right data.
Being unable to generate alerts.
P17 The fact that adversaries will always be one step further.
The necessity of adopting an adversarial mindset.
P18 Adopting the wrong ways toward structuring the SOC.
Poorly planned investment mistakes.
P7, P12, P13, P15, P16 Stated that every aspect was covered in the interview.
Table 3: Other SOC issues that participants mentioned in their interview.
4.3.2 Insufficient Budget
Six of our manager participants stated that they had sufficient
budget for their SOCs; however, some of our manager participants
stated their budgetary concerns or constraints.
In some cases, the budget must be approved by organizational
powers above the SOC manager. P13 experienced a problem with
their superiors. The participant stated that they had a critical plan
that they put on hold and said:
We have a really good appliance that detects a huge number
of incidents in our environment; however, the appliance is not
inline, so it does not block the activity. We can see the activity,
but we are still allowing it. That is a huge issue, and it is
because the budget has not been approved to move it inline.
Organizations can have several SOCs around the world. In these
cases, employees require a travel budget to visit other SOCs and
train employees who work in those SOCs. P14 stated that they have
a limited budget for training and international travel. P13 stated
that they do not have enough funding for employee training and
international travels. The participant said:
The only budget problem that we have was on training and
international travels. That would be the only place that we are
not well funded.
In some situations, organizations make risk-based decisions because
they do not have an unlimited budget for their SOC. P14 argued
that industry focus also plays a role and said:
I think we always want more, but there is a risk-based decision.
We cannot spend a billion dollars on cybersecurity. We are not
a tool company. We are a financial institution, so we have to
balance sometimes.
Burnout is a prominent issue for SOCs that is also related to lack
of budget. One of our manager participants, P10, discussed this by
stating:
We have happy hours, so everyone goes out to have some drinks,
eat dinner outside. Kind of, go interact with your peers, it is
really team building thing here and there. [...] I also recommend
employees to take some time off when they work six or seven
weeks straight. [...] As long as you keep them engaged, they
tend to have less burnout, but again it is a financial burden,
but we are very lucky because we have the ability to do that.
4.3.3 Challenge of Scaling SOC Technologies
A SOC is scalable if it allows the integration of new technology or
the removal of existing technology without major complications.
All manager participants stated that their SOC is scalable and
integrating new technology provides benefits; however, three participants (P5, P14, and P15), added that, in some cases, it was challenging to add new technologies to the SOC.
Regarding these challenges, P14 mentioned the complexity and
the difficulty of integrating new technology into their currently
active SOC. As an analogy, the participant said:
Session 9A: User Study CCS ’19, November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom 1964
We are flying a plane, and we also need to change the engine while we are flying that plane. So, sometimes, that is the
balance we need to maintain.
5 ACTIONABLE ADVICE AND RESEARCH
OPPORTUNITIES
In this paper, we identified mismatched issues, and we see our work
as the first step toward resolving these issues. We suggest SOCs,
especially managers, follow-up on our findings and communicate
with their analysts in terms of automation, evaluation metrics, and
tool functionality. For example, for evaluation metrics, we suggest
that SOC managers describe the metrics that they use to their
employees and justify the reason why they use those metrics. This
way, managers will not only receive valuable feedback from their
analysts but also ease the feeling of unjustness that their analysts
are experiencing. Based on our interview data, we envision three
research opportunities regarding SOCs.
5.1 Asset Discovery and Registration
As seen in Table 2, analysts and managers are in agreement that a
low level of visibility of devices and network topology is a significant issue. Therefore, a high level of visibility is vital toward SOC
success because a SOC cannot prevent an incident that happens in
an area that it cannot see.
As one of our participants mentioned in Section 4.1.1, SOCs
need a way to discover every asset that is active on the network,
including previously-unknown assets that are newly connected to
the network.
To develop such a mechanism is challenging due to many factors
such as different industry sectors, the user profile, organizational
structure, size of the network, infrastructure, and type of the SOC.
The research community should explore such scenarios and suggest
ways either to develop novel approaches that would apply to every
SOC or be adaptable for each scenario.
5.2 Effective Education
SOC training programs, internal or commercial, are critical to fulfilling the organization’s security mission, however our results show
that SOC analysts are not satisfied with their training programs.
There have been many research studies that focused on the
efficiency and effectiveness of students’ learning in virtual environments and yielded promising results [9, 11, 23, 35].
Moreover, there were a few research studies specifically on security education, including a game in the form of an interactive
environment, CyberCIEGE, to explore the effectiveness of such environments on learning [26], and another study in which researchers
proposed an open-source platform called "i-tee" for simulating security attacks in a virtual sandbox environment [14].
It is also worth mentioning that the United States Army is currently testing a virtual environment for “persistent and realistic
training” [1, 7].
The unique environment of a SOC is the perfect candidate for
such investigations. The academic community should investigate if
virtual interactive learning environments can alleviate the current
issues regarding employee education, help to improve the efficiency
of learning, and fortify the self-efficacy of SOC employees by simulating a real SOC environment.
Furthermore, our participants stated that phishing attacks are
still the most prevalent attacks in organizations. These virtual environments might also be useful for increasing security awareness
against phishing attacks by interactively simulating their consequences.
5.3 Improved SOC Security Metrics
As Herley et al. [21] stated in their recent work, there has been
significant work on properly measuring security, using both quantitative and qualitative metrics; however, “progress here has been
slow.” Researchers are still trying to create better, more suitable
metrics to measure security. However, security metrics that are
specific to SOCs are still an open area of research. One specific
research direction is to investigate ways to predict the longevity of
a vulnerability in different systems of an organization’s SOC.
6 LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Our study has a number of limitations, and in this section we
describe some of those limitations, how the limitations impact
the study and results, and the techniques we applied to reduce
the impact of those limitations. We also discuss future research
directions from this work.
Data Sensitivity. Data that flows through the SOC is sensitive, and
the consequences of it being leaked are severe. Given the sensitivity
of the topics covered in this research study, it is possible that some
participants may not have responded truthfully.
To prevent this from happening, we informed the participants
that all questions are optional, and they are free not to answer if
they do not feel comfortable answering them before and during the
interviews. We believe that most of our responses are accurate, and
participants would choose not to answer in the first place if they
think they cannot or will not respond truthfully.
Generalization. Another limitation of our research study is that
our results may not be generalized to all SOCs, as we had a limited
number of interviews. It is worth mentioning that our participants’
SOCs are from industry sectors including airline, construction, education, financial services, information technology, and professional
services, which covers a wide range of organizations. Furthermore,
to improve the applicability and exhaustiveness of our results, we
created questions that would cover all aspects of SOCs.
Participant Recruitment. Some of the participants were from
large, well-known organizations in which employees have limited
time for such research studies. We are worried that some SOC professionals may have declined our request for participation because
they wanted to learn the immediate benefit that they will get from
this study, which we could not provide at the time. To prevent
this issue, we added the following to our recruitment email: “If
this research study is carried out successfully and we receive conclusive results, the limitations of current SOCs will be identified. This
outcome may provide potential benefits to the individuals that participate in this study, given that they are part of their organization’s
SOC”.
We used Snowball Sampling to recruit six of our participants
with the goal of recruiting a manager and an analyst from the same
Session 9A: User Study CCS ’19, November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom 1965
organization. In the case that the SOC manager referred to one of
their analysts as a participant for the study, the manager chose one
of their analysts from a number of analysts. Because of this reason,
this selection might have been biased, and also the sample might
not represent all of the analysts in that organization. This selection
bias and the issue of representativeness does not exist when an
analyst referred to their manager as a potential participant since
there is only one SOC manager.
Sentiment Analysis. The participants of our study conveyed
sentiments through interviews, which can be observed by their
tones, actions, and speech. For example, when we asked about the
reporting mechanism, one participant responded:
Let me explain the setup because it is a little bit complicated
(sigh).
Future research could apply sentiment analysis to the transcripts
to understand participants’ emotional responses to various topics.
Best Practices vs. Reality Analysis. We found multiple realities
that are different from the best practices suggested by the security
community. For example, while Zimmerman et al. recommends
consolidating computer network defense under one group [55]
(Chapter 3), some organizations have “several institutions” to cowork on the response of incident reports, and some organizations
even have “two SOCs.” Future research could conduct a comparison
between the best practices and the reality and investigate whether
the best practices are of distinguishable advantage over the other
options based on the experience of the interview participants.
Pair Analysis. In our analysis, we discovered contradictory responses from participants who work in the same organization but
in different roles as managers and analysts. In this paper, we analyzed matched and mismatched responses of all our analysts and
managers because the total number of our participants was not
enough to do such a pair analysis. Future research can recruit more
participants, and by having more pairs, investigate matches and
mismatches among pairs.
Industry Sector Analysis. Different SOC from various industries
can have distinct problems. In this paper, we had participants from
industry sectors, including airline, construction, education, financial services, information technology, and professional services.
Internal vs. Outsourced SOC Analysis. Different SOC types
can have distinct problems. For instance, in our analysis, compared
to an internal SOC, we observed that visibility and response speed
issues arise more in outsourced SOCs because of the nature of
provider/client agreements, a client’s limited budget, and a client’s
inability to cooperate with the provider. Future work can focus on
each type of SOCs and analyze their unique issues.
Tiered vs. Non-tiered SOC Analysis. In this study, in total, we
had 18 participants; however, only two of them were from a nontiered SOC. This number was not enough for us to analyze each
structure. Given that, in comparison, each SOC hierarchical structure can have superiority over each other in some aspects. Future
work can independently study each structure and analyze their
unique advantages and disadvantages.
Security Tool Analysis. In this study, we comprehensively analyzed the perspective differences of managers and analysts toward
various aspects of SOCs. Among these aspects, we asked our participants what they think about their tools and their functionality
issues without going into detail on specific tools and toolsets. Some
of the names of the tools that our participants mentioned using
are Splunk [48] (SIEM), NitroSecurity products [24] (SIEM), ArcSight [16] (SIEM), McAfee Intrusion Detection System [25] (IDS),
FireEye products [15] (Collection of security tools), and Proofpoint [38] (Email Security). Future work can conduct a deeper
qualitative and quantitative analysis of specific tools and toolsets
that organizations commonly use in their SOCs.
7 RELATED WORK
Past research studies that are related to SOCs focused on improving the efficiency of human analysts. Sundaramurthy et al. [44]
adopted an anthropological approach to study SOC environments,
and they applied ethnographic methods to close gaps between researchers and participants by studying Computer Security Incident
Response Teams (CSIRTs) [46]. As a continuation, they conducted
an anthropological study at a corporate SOC for over six months
and proposed a model that explains the analyst burnout phenomenon [43]. In their other work, they discussed analyst burnout and
reduced effectiveness as adverse effects of failure in conflict resolution [47] and tool-based solutions are proposed to improve SOC
efficiency [45].
Axon et al. [2] examined the perspectives of security practitioners by incorporation of non-speech audio into their working
environment by analyzing its integration and design requirements.
Onwubiko [36] proposed a framework to ensure swift incident resolution and to maintain secure business operations for organizations.
The author discussed SOC operations and provided recommendations for best practices related to those operations. Zhong et al. [54]
presented a suggestion model that traces the operations of analysts
and makes recommendations of actions based on the match with
senior analysts’ performance. The goals were to avoid novice analysts from being overwhelmed by the influx of incidents and to
help them with the triage of those incidents. Goodall et al. [18]
presented a visual analytics system, Situ, which they designed for
analysts to identify anomalies while watching the network for security events. Janos et al. [27] discussed some good practices such
as training for employees, friendly reporting system, and having
endpoint detection systems as countermeasures to defend against
cybercrimes.
Security incident and event management (SIEM) systems are important because they collect, normalize, and analyze incidents from
multiple sources that are handled by security analysts to protect the
organization. Therefore, with the increase of more sophisticated
and novel attacks, it is important for the SIEM tools to evolve [5].
Additionally, Miloslavskaya et al. [33] shared the concern of having an integrated incident management system for organizations’
internal security.
Various research studies focus on the issue of log management
because logs are the first piece of information consulted when an
attack is encountered. As stored logs are used by organizations
for forensics, reviewing, and auditing future incidents, Madani et
al. [32] designed a log management functional architecture for
network event analysis. Beehive automatically mines and extracts
useful data from the overloaded collection of information [52].
Yuan [53] introduced an architecture based on correlation analysis
Session 9A: User Study CCS ’19, November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom 1966
to reduce duplicate alarms, correlate different security events, and
suggest measures to tackle security events. In their recent work,
Hassan et al. [20] presented a tool, NoDoze, to combat information
overload problem that security analysts are experiencing in large
enterprises due to the high volume of false alarms.
There are other research studies that we consider related yet
did not focus on SOCs specifically. For example, previous work has
studied the workplace of IT security professionals [8] and investigated the workflow, decision processes, and cognitive activities
in which information assurance analysts engage [10]. Werlinger
et al. [49, 51] carried out a participatory observation to identify IT
security practitioners’ interactions, along with making recommendations on improving tool support for complex security tasks. In
another study, Werlinger et al. [50] identified challenges faced by
IT security practitioners among human, organizational, and technological factors from semi-structured interviews and analyzed
using qualitative description. In a recent study, Stevens et al. [41]
presented a case study on the use of formalized threat modeling by
security professionals and the benefits it brings to the entire organization’s security posture. In other field studies, researchers observed
work practices, tools misalignment, and problem-solving strategies
of system administrators [3, 19]. Dietrich et al. [12] conducted a
qualitative study to understand the perspective of system operators
on security configurations and analyze what they perceive as the
root cause of security incidents.
In our work, we investigated the potential technical and nontechnical issues of SOCs in a more comprehensive manner. Furthermore, we explored manager-based and analyst-based perspectives
toward issues and their mitigation by crafting role-specific questions. In our study, we identified several issues that we consider to
be critical for SOCs and the overall security posture of organizations.
8 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we conducted a comprehensive qualitative study of
SOCs and discovered issues in SOCs. Furthermore, we identified the
issues that managers and analysts agree and disagree on, and we
proposed advice as well as research opportunities that will improve
SOCs.
We believe that our findings will encourage SOC professionals
to develop an understanding of each other and put aside their differences. We also believe that this work provides a path forward for
future research in this area, bridging the gap between the academic
research community and the real-world needs of SOCs.