Abstract
People with multiple chronic conditions (MCC) often face complex and overwhelming conflicts in their personal health management. However, little is known about how technology can help users to address these challenges. Better understanding the practices involved in conflict resolution is necessary to guide the design of technology aiming to support this population. This interview study investigated the strategies seniors use to overcome conflicts involving different health issues, their self-care tasks, risks of another illness or complication, and their personal values. We report on the different strategies used to address these conflicts, such as seeking advice and information from different sources to prioritize and compromise. Compromising often involves purposefully deciding against conventional treatments or self-care activities. We argue that rich information and flexibility are required to support decision making in MCC self-care, and advocate for a holistic perspective in technology design for health management. These implications also apply to systems focused on a single illness, as many of their users might live with other conditions.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Multiple chronic conditions

Co-morbidities

Self-care

Multimorbidity

1. Introduction
Over the last decade, chronic illness management has drawn increased attention in the HCI community (Fitzpatrick, Ellingsen, 2013, Nunes, Verdezoto, Fitzpatrick, Kyng, Grönvall, Storni, 2015). Researchers have investigated how to design new chronic care technologies for conditions such as diabetes, heart disease, chronic pain, and kidney disease (e.g., Chen, 2010, Felipe, Singh, Bradley, Williams, Bianchi-Berthouze, 2015, Mamykina, Mynatt, Davidson, Greenblatt, 2008, Sota, Yamamoto, Hirakawa, Doi, Yamamoto, 2011, Vosbergen, Colkesen, Lacroix, Mosis, Stappers, Kraaijenhagen, Peek, 2010).

Most of these studies have focused on a single chronic illness. In reality, though, many people live with multiple chronic conditions (MCC). In 2012, an estimated 26% of the U.S. population as a whole, and 60% of seniors (65 or older), had MCC (Ward, 2014). Because MCC can lead to severe consequences (e.g., disability, functional decline, poor quality of life, and mental distress), effective management is crucial for the health and well-being of those with MCC, especially seniors (Fortin, Bravo, Hudon, Lapointe, Almirall, Dubois, Vanasse, 2006, Marengoni, Angleman, Melis, Mangialasche, Karp, Garmen, Meinow, Fratiglioni, 2011, Wang, Beyer, Gensichen, Gerlach, 2008).

Managing MCC is often more challenging than managing a single chronic disease, and, as a result, it can be highly burdensome and overwhelming (Eckerblad, Theander, Ekdahl, Jaarsma, Hellstrom, 2015, Löffler, Kaduszkiewicz, Stolzenbach, Streich, Fuchs, van den Bussche, Stolper, Altiner, 2012, Ploeg, Matthew-Maich, Fraser, Dufour, McAiney, Kaasalainen, Markle-Reid, Upshur, Cleghorn, Emili, 2017, Roberto, Gigliotti, Husser, 2005). Individuals with MCC are also more likely to suffer adverse drug events such as those caused by drug-drug interactions (Vogeli et al., 2007). Because most clinical guidelines and disease management programs focus on a single condition (Vogeli et al., 2007), people with MCC do not have sufficient guidelines and programs on which to rely.

Although people who have MCC are more likely to use technology in their self-care (Lupiáñez-Villanueva et al., 2018), little is known about how to design technology for one of the main challenges they face: managing conflicts that occur when a treatment or symptom for one disease aggravates another disease, or when drugs for different conditions interact, affecting treatment safety or effectiveness (Bayliss, Steiner, Fernald, Crane, Main, 2003, Schoenberg, Bardach, Manchikanti, Goodenow, 2011, Zulman, Asch, Martins, Kerr, Hoffman, Goldstein, 2014). Previous work has focused on general MCC self-care strategies, associated challenges (e.g., Bayliss, Ellis, Steiner, 2007, Loeb, Penrod, Falkenstern, Gueldner, Poon, 2003), and specific aspects of self-care (e.g., medication management Doyle et al., 2017, and the values of patients and caregivers Berry, Lim, Hartzler, Hirsch, Ludman, Wagner, Ralston, 2017, Lim, Berry, Hirsch, Hartzler, Wagner, Ludman, Ralston, 2016). Understanding the strategies used to address conflicts is crucial to the design of technology aiming to assist people with MCC in their health-management work.

To address this research gap, we turn to older adults, as they have a high prevalence of MCC. We report on the outcomes of an interview study with 17 seniors with MCC. This study reveals that seniors living with MCC use several strategies to handle MCC-related challenges, namely: seeking help from knowledgeable health care providers; self-advocating for MCC-focused health care; deciding which illness, treatment, or activity to prioritize; and relying on patient expertise to make decisions.

Our contributions to HCI and health informatics research are three-fold: First, we contribute a detailed analysis of MCC-related conflicts seniors experience, and the challenges they create. Second, our study describes the strategies involved in managing MCC-related conflicts, advancing our understanding of self-care practices of seniors with MCC. Third, we derive implications for health technology design to facilitate MCC patients’ practices in handling pervasive conflicts in their everyday lives.

2. Background
Managing chronic conditions requires self-care activities to control symptoms, prevent or delay illness progression, and promote well-being. Self-care encompasses illness work (i.e., managing symptoms and treatments), everyday life work (i.e., personal and professional responsibilities), and biographical work (i.e., coping with how illness impacts one’s life and identity) (Corbin, Strauss, 1985, Nunes, Verdezoto, Fitzpatrick, Kyng, Grönvall, Storni, 2015, Tentori, Hayes, Reddy, 2012). While a few studies have investigated this population’s self-care practices, less is known about the strategies used to manage conflicts.

2.1. Managing multiple chronic conditions
People with MCC face challenges within the health care system and in their self-care work. Healthcare systems typically address conditions individually by design. For example, medical guidelines for individual conditions might lead to adverse effects when combined (Boyd et al., 2005). Further, those with MCC are often excluded from clinical studies (He et al., 2016). This population faces a healthcare system that is particularly fragmented, inefficient, and ineffective at addressing their needs (Boyd and Fortin, 2010).

Many barriers complicate MCC management, such as extensive or complex treatments, lack of knowledge, conflicting information, gaps in communication with health care providers, difficulty finding reliable information, lack of agency in decision-making, substantial financial burden, lack of social support, and emotional barriers (e.g., feeling overwhelmed) (Bayliss, Ellis, Steiner, 2007, Bayliss, Steiner, Fernald, Crane, Main, 2003, Haverhals, Lee, Siek, Darr, Linnebur, Ruscin, Ross, 2011, Lehnert, Heider, Leicht, Heinrich, Corrieri, Luppa, Riedel-Heller, Knig, 2011, Vogeli, Shields, Lee, Gibson, Marder, Weiss, Blumenthal, 2007). Such barriers can prevent people with MCC from self-managing effectively (Liddy et al., 2014), often leading to feelings of helplessness (Eckerblad et al., 2015).

Many of the challenges faced by MCC patients are caused by the need to manage information, advice, concerns, values, restrictions, or treatments that are not completely compatible (Zhu, Moffa, Wang, Abdullah, Julaiti, Carroll, 2018, Zulman, Jenchura, Cohen, Lewis, Houston, Asch, 2015). For instance, walking can be recommended for managing hypertension, but it may result in aggravating chronic pain (Singh et al., 2014). MCC patients might also struggle to take care of their chronic illnesses while facing acute health issues (Zhu et al., 2018). We refer to these challenges as conflicts. Previous work has also described these challenges as a form of synergy, since MCC may lead to issues that are not caused by any individual illness (Bayliss, Steiner, Fernald, Crane, Main, 2003, Marengoni, Angleman, Melis, Mangialasche, Karp, Garmen, Meinow, Fratiglioni, 2011).

Although conflicts represent substantial challenges for MCC self-care, few studies have focused on how those with MCC overcome these conflicts. Previous work investigating self-care strategies in MCC have taken a broad perspective to understand challenges involved in MCC self-care (e.g., Bayliss, Steiner, Fernald, Crane, Main, 2003, Schoenberg, Bardach, Manchikanti, Goodenow, 2011) or focused on other specific issues (e.g., coping with the psychological impact of MCC (Leach, Schoenberg, 2008, Roberto, Gigliotti, Husser, 2005), managing health information (Ancker et al., 2015)).

Conflicts in self-management is a recurring theme in HCI research focusing on MCC. (Doyle et al., 2019) described how patients can struggle to exercise because of limitations caused by respiratory disease. Berry et al. (2017b) found that patients and caregivers experience challenges when their values or behaviors are misaligned, creating disagreements. Communication and coordination between patients, caregivers, and healthcare providers is necessary to identify and resolve such conflicts (Berry, Lim, Hartzler, Hirsch, Ludman, Wagner, Ralston, 2017, Lim, Berry, Hirsch, Hartzler, Wagner, Ludman, Ralston, 2016). Recent work has characterized patient-clinician communication into several dimensions (e.g., guidance, effort, disclosure) (Berry et al., 2019), and argued that promoting reflection is important for people with MCC to gain awareness and articulate their values (Lim et al., 2019). Researchers have also investigated medication management (Doyle et al., 2017), goal setting (Doyle et al., 2018), prehabilitation (Zhu et al., 2018), and the use of technology to look for information in the context of MCC (Zulman et al., 2015).

Many researchers have argued that conflicts represent one of the most difficult aspects of MCC. Past work indicates a need for technology to help this population in their biographical and everyday life work, incorporating coping strategies (Leach, Schoenberg, 2008, Roberto, Gigliotti, Husser, 2005) and values (e.g., Berry et al., 2017b). Studies investigating MCC self-management have found several different patient strategies, such as searching for information about different conditions, and coordinating between different health care providers (e.g., Bayliss et al., 2008). There remains a gap in understanding the illness work involved specifically in dealing with conflicts, and how we can design technology that helps users with MCC in this process.

2.2. Patient expertise
Previous research (e.g., Civan, Pratt, 2007, Hartzler, Pratt, 2011) has emphasized the importance of patient expertise in chronic illness management. Patient expertise refers to “the experiential knowledge that patients have gained about effectively accomplishing the work of being a patient,” such as “action strategies, recommended knowledge, suggested approaches, and information resources for dealing with problems” (Civan and Pratt, 2007). Patient expertise includes patient strategies developed through trial and error, and is often used to handle daily challenges (Hartzler and Pratt, 2011). It differs from medical expertise, emphasizing self-care rather than medical aspects of health (Civan-Hartzler et al., 2010). This knowledge can be gained by coordinating and translating various knowledge resources (e.g., medical information, personal experiences) into practical courses of action in their context. Several studies in HCI have focused on patient expertise (e.g., Civan, McDonald, Unruh, Pratt, 2009, Civan-Hartzler, McDonald, Powell, Skeels, Mukai, Pratt, 2010, Park, Chen, 2017). However, little is known regarding the expertise of patients with MCC and how to design technology to support the development and application of their patient expertise.

In summary, while previous research has documented challenges involved in living with MCC, little work has investigated how this population can address conflicts in their self-care. This study investigates seniors’ strategies for addressing MCC-related conflicts with the goal of laying a foundation for future technology design.

3. Methods
We conducted an interview study with 17 seniors with MCC to learn about their approach to self-care, their past experiences with health management and health care providers, and the challenges they encountered. Participants were recruited from a retirement community located in the U.S. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at the authors’ institution and authorized by the community director. Informed consent was obtained from all participants. Each participant received $25 in cash.

3.1. Setting
All participants live independently in a retirement community where residents are responsible for managing their own health, and most of them have MCC. This institution attracts seniors who anticipate requiring assistance in the future and those who wish to reduce their responsibilities regarding errands, chores, and property management. Both of these motivations can be caused or heightened by chronic conditions and disabilities. All participants also had high socioeconomic status (SES). Prior work has found that conflict resolution strategies are limited in low-SES settings, partially due to financial concerns and barriers to healthcare access (Bayliss et al., 2003). We recruited high-SES participants purposefully to better understand conflict management strategies in a setting without such barriers, seeking novel insights that will be informative for technology design.

3.2. Participants
Participants were eligible for the study if they were 65 or older, had multiple chronic conditions, and were responsible for managing their own health. We interviewed 11 women and 6 men, from ages 74 to 100. Their median age was 84 years old. All were retired, and their education ranged from having some college credits to having a doctoral degree. The majority of participants were white, and four were multiracial. Each participant reported having between 2 and 10 chronic diseases or other health issues, with a median of 5. Table 1 lists the reported conditions for each participant. We included conditions and relevant medical history that have an ongoing impact on the individual’s health or daily life (e.g., hypertension, loss of hearing, and past surgery). Most participants were widowed, three were married, one was single, and one was divorced. All participants lived independently, either with their spouse (P2, P4, P5) or alone. Two participants had part-time caregivers who did not live with them (P1, P13).


Table 1. List of participants and their health conditions.

P#	Age	Conditions and relevant medical history
1	95	Gastrointestinal disease; urinary tract infection; hearing, vision, and balance loss
2	87	Gastrointestinal disease; osteoporosis
3	82	Diabetes; hypertension; urinary incontinence
4	77	Chronic back pain; diabetes; high cholesterol; mild cognitive impairment; urinary incontinence; cancer (in remission)
5	74	Arthritis; degenerative joint disease; diabetes, hypertension, torn rotator cuffs
6	75	Factor V Leiden; occipital neuralgia; osteoporosis; temporomandibular joint dysfunction
7	89	Atrial fibrillation; Gastrointestinal disease; hearing loss; renal insufficiency; cancer (in remission)
8	83	Balance loss; joint pain; scoliosis; skin condition; vertigo
9	79	Diabetes; kidney disease
10	94	Chronic pain; cancer (in remission); disability due to hip surgery
11	85	Hypertension; high cholesterol; pre-diabetes
12	91	Fatigue; hypertension; high cholesterol; muscle spasms; osteoporosis; urinary incontinence
13	84	Arthritis; glaucoma; keratoconus; shoulder and hip surgery; cancer (in remission)
14	84	Atrial fibrillation; fatigue; high cholesterol; Gastrointestinal disease; incontinence; cancer (in remission)
15	100	Loss of vision, balance, hearing
16	87	Arthritis; chronic pain; diabetes; hypertension; knee and foot surgery; spinal stenosis; stroke (past); loss of hearing and vision
17	80	Hip surgery; Parkinson’s disease
3.3. Data collection and analysis
In the semi-structured interviews conducted, we asked participants about their health conditions, self-care practices, including their relationship with health care providers, daily tasks, and their approach to health management. Examples of primary interview topics include: who is involved in their health care, utilization of health care services, their relationship with their health care providers, and the activities they conduct to manage their MCC, particularly when conflicts arise. Each interview was audio recorded and lasted approximately one hour on average.

The interviews were transcribed and anonymized. We used thematic analysis (Braun and Clarke, 2006) to analyze our data using an inductive process. Two authors first familiarized themselves with the data by reading the interview transcripts. Through multiple rounds of careful reading, we generated an initial list of codes which identify features of the data (Braun and Clarke, 2006). During this process, the two researchers had regular meetings to discuss and compare codes. Based on the initial list of codes, we focused on analyzing the broader themes. We sorted different codes into potential, overarching themes, and collated all the related data within the identified themes. Next, we carefully compared the identified themes and refined them. Lastly, we defined and named overarching themes. Our final thematic map of the data includes two major themes: conflicts in MCC management, and how patients address conflicts. In the following section, we present these two themes. While strategies used to manage conflicts are the primary focus of this work, the conflicts are described first in detail to provide context to those findings.

4. Findings
Our participants face multiple conflicts in MCC management. These conflicts consist of situations where particular restrictions, needs, or activities resulting from different medical conditions, treatments, or personal preferences are incompatible. As a consequence, seniors develop different strategies to handle and overcome these challenges, including balancing trade-offs, seeking personalized care and guidance from health care providers, building patient expertise, and adapting self-care activities to accommodate the limitations and needs arising from different conditions. In this section, we report 1) the different types of conflicts that arose in managing MCC, and 2) patient strategies for tackling these conflicts.

4.1. Conflicts in MCC management
The complexity in managing MCC stems from the interplay of various treatments, limitations, and risks that arise with multiple medical conditions. We identified three types of conflicts resulting from MCC: conflicts between different treatments; conflicts involving illness and a self-care activity; and conflicts involving temporal aspects of MCC.

4.1.1. Conflicts between treatments for different conditions
Many MCC patients need special considerations in their care due to incompatibilities between treatments for their different conditions. When the treatment for one condition interferes with the treatment of another, it can lead to risks to the person’s life and well-being. These conflicts tend to emerge in times of change (e.g., before a new treatment) and can create serious health risks for seniors, especially those with insufficient support from health care providers. For example, P4 explained how he could not treat each condition in isolation:

“When I was younger, if you had a problem it was treated, and the problem was resolved. Now, if you have a problem, you have to take into consideration other problems. [...] Normally [specialists] attack that problem without necessarily being concerned about the whole person.” (P4)

In this quote, P4 contrasts his current experience of managing MCC with the past, when there were no other conditions to consider. He highlights the need for holistic healthcare when managing multiple conditions.

For people with MCC, treatment goals that focus on a single condition may not make sense given the set of conditions the person is experiencing. Treatment decisions must be made considering not only the impact on a specific disease or symptom but the overall well-being of the patient. For example, one participant experienced a severe adverse event and needed emergency care due to her conditions being treated in isolation:

“When I had my kidney out, I was on Digoxin for atrial fibrillation. [...] With one kidney, [my doctor] should have reduced my dosage in half. [...] [the ER doctor said] ‘we have to put you on Digibind and get the Digoxin out or you are gonna have a heart attack.’ ” (P7)

Seniors with MCC rely on medical professionals to identify such conflicts, as they often lack the necessary knowledge to do so on their own. According to P7, she had informed her provider about the surgery, but her provider was unaware that the medication dosage needed to be adjusted. P7’s physician may not have re-evaluated whether the standard care for P7’s heart condition was still appropriate in light of her recent procedure. As a result, P7 lost confidence in this provider’s ability to handle her complex, non-standard medical needs, which lead P7 to take more responsibility for managing her health care.

However, even when health care providers identify these conflicts, they may not always resolve them, leaving seniors with uncertainties that they must then address on their own. For instance, P17 experienced a conflict when a medication needed to be suspended so that other doctors could perform a more pressing procedure to treat his back pain caused by spinal stenosis and arthritis. In the interview, he expressed uncertainty about whether it was safe to stop taking the medication for an extended period of time. The conflict also caused P17 to re-evaluate whether or not a treatment prescribed over 30 years beforehand is even necessary:

“You can’t take [this medication] if you’re getting any kind of surgery or procedure. And the problem is, do I need to take it? Because I am taking it for an injury I got in 1982.” (P17)

This quote shows how seniors with MCC may be treated for different conditions at vastly different points in time. In many cases, including P17’s, this causes challenges that tend to place a heavier burden on the patient. Specifically, P17 explained that the physician who originally prescribed the medication no longer sees him, and his current providers are not cardiologists, so they do not have the necessary expertise to advise him. As a result, P17 is left with unanswered questions and the responsibility of managing the conflict.

These stories demonstrate the kinds of conflicts between different conditions that people with MCC experience. They suggest that a change in health, such as a new treatment, might require re-evaluating the pre-existing treatments and conditions of seniors with MCC in order to identify potential conflicts. In addition, although seniors depend on medical professionals to find and assist with resolving such conflicts, problems such as breakdowns in trust and temporal challenges sometimes prevent this. When this happens, patients must actively pursue a solution.

Managing the treatment of multiple chronic conditions can be difficult for patients even when their providers are fully aware of and attentive to their complex situations. When patients feel that their doctors have not adequately attended to treatment interactions (P7) or do not have the appropriate expertise (P17), they might need to take action to address a conflict and to prevent adverse health events.

4.1.2. Conflicts between conditions and self-care efforts
As with the previous type of conflict, conflicts emerge between patients’ self-care activities for one condition and limitations caused by another. When seniors with MCC have insufficient knowledge and support, these conflicts may be difficult to prevent or resolve, and they often pose safety risks. However, unlike the previous type, seniors with MCC usually have more control over self-care activities and may choose to resolve these conflicts on their own or seek assistance from professionals.

Our participants commonly discussed conflicts related to two self-care activities: exercise and diet. In these cases, participants struggled to follow medical advice due to the limitations caused by their conditions. Conflicts with exercise tended to be discovered through trial and error, while conflicts with diet may be known, but more difficult to manage and resolve. Standard information, guidelines, and tools designed to support patients with a single condition, often fail to account for potential conflicts that may arise due to having other conditions and, thus, are often inadequate for supporting seniors with MCC.

Physical exercise was cited as an important part of all of our participants’ self-care, whether to improve or maintain their health by increasing balance, decreasing pain, or controlling other symptoms. While exercise is beneficial for some illnesses, it can have a negative impact on others. Failure to identify and resolve these conflicts can worsen an existing health problem or lead to injury. For example, P8, who has vertigo episodes, had an exercise class trigger her condition:

“I had a bad experience because I got an attack of vertigo and I threw up all over the floor. So I didn’t do that [exercise] class anymore.” (P8)

Our participants wanted to exercise, both for their general well-being and because it often had positive impacts on some of their conditions. However, in a few instances, they were unaware of a potential conflict, and the exercise classes were not tailored to their particular needs or limitations. As a result, conflicts were only identified after the participant attended a class and, subsequently, experienced a health issue. In these situations, seniors decided to seek different options for physical activities.

In other cases, exercising triggered symptoms for participants. P17 recognized that walking was necessary for his arthritis, both to manage the pain it caused but also to prevent it from becoming worse. However, his chronic back pain was only relieved by sitting or laying down.

“My biggest problem is walking or standing. [...] With arthritis you’ve got to get moving. That’s why in the morning I am in great pain.” (P17)

For P17, actions that prevented or relieved symptoms from one condition triggered other symptoms. He was left with the challenge of finding the kind and amount of exercise that would treat his arthritis without aggravating his back pain too much.

As with exercise, many of our participants wanted to follow a healthy diet, as well as adhere to any condition-specific restrictions. However, when managing several different illnesses, they often had to follow a complex set of rules, and these restrictions quickly became burdensome. For instance, P4 described the difficulty in adhering to a diabetes-friendly, low cholesterol diet, as it can be challenging to find meal options that are low in fat and carbohydrates:

“I’ve been on cholesterol medication forever. When the diabetes started up I said, if I have to choose between sugar and fat, which way do I go?” (P4)

In the quote above, P4 frames his dietary restrictions as conflicting even though they are not inherently incompatible. This kind of combination of different dietary restrictions was experienced as a conflict because following them at once was difficult and burdensome. It was difficult because following it strictly left them with few or no meal options in the context of their daily lives, and burdensome due to requiring cognitive effort multiple times per day.

In contrast to exercise, these participants were aware of the dietary restrictions but found it frustrating to find options that followed all of the rules. However, like exercise, access to personalized resources that encompass all of their specific needs or restrictions is limited.

These findings illustrate the kinds of conflicts that arise between self-care activities, such as diet and exercise, and different illnesses. Seniors with MCC need to find balance in their self-care tasks for their different conditions. Our participants learned from personal experience (exercise) and from guidelines (diet). However, they found that the support available for these activities was often insufficient for those dealing with multiple conditions. This made it difficult for participants to determine the best course of action.

4.1.3. Conflicts involving past or anticipated health issues
There is a temporal aspect to conflicts in MCC. In addition to existing chronic illnesses, several seniors discussed conflicts involving past health issues or potential future conditions. Both of these kinds of conflicts influenced their health care decisions.

Past health issues such as acute diseases, past injuries, or prior medical procedures such as surgeries can lead to conflicts. As described previously, P7 experienced a conflict involving a past kidney surgery, P17 faced a conflict involving a past injury, and several participants experienced challenges with physical activity due to a previous fall or surgery.

For people already managing MCC, a new condition is more than just “one more problem,” and instead represents another layer of complexity and interactions with multiple existing conditions. As a result, our participants’ experiences of MCC often drove their treatment decisions, and they tended to prefer a holistic approach to treatment.

Future health issues were often discussed in terms of perceived risks. Seniors were concerned about illnesses that are more common in old age, severe diseases such as cancer, those that they might be genetically susceptible to, or those that are associated with treatments for their current illnesses. A few participants told us that in order to prevent an illness in the future, and potentially add another condition to their existing MCC, they chose to decline specific medical treatments due to their associated risks. For instance, P6 chose not to receive hormonal treatment for osteoporosis because of the increased risk of cancer:

“I cannot believe that women are still on estrogen on their 70’s and 80’s with all the risk. [...] I know you can easily get a fracture. [...] I’ve made the decision and I’m ready if that’s the case.” (P6)

While P6 did not have cancer, she approached this treatment decision as if she was dealing with conflicts between existing diseases. Knowing the risks and carefully considering them made her decide not to pursue the treatment. For her, the risk of adding a new condition as a result of hormone therapy outweighed the potential benefit as a treatment for her current osteoporosis.

P3’s doctor recommended an age-adjusted and more modest goal for A1C (glycated hemoglobin), an indicator of blood glucose. However, P3 wanted a more aggressive diabetes treatment:

“[my doctor] said, ‘you know, as you get older, we don’t look for 7 - we’re happy with 8.’ I said, ‘I’m not happy with 8. I want to know how to fix it.’ [...] I’m not comfortable with saying, ‘well, that’s just aging.’ We get that a lot. Some of my friends, their hair goes on fire when a doctor says that, honestly.” (P3)

A complication caused by diabetes could become an additional condition for P3, along with her current MCC. Even though she is older, she still wants to do what she can to minimize the chances of developing diabetes-related complications. Although there is evidence that pursuing a lower A1C in old age can increase risks of severe hypoglycemia (Miller et al., 2014), we do not intend to make a judgment about P3’s decision. But rather, to reflect her perspective. In this context, P3 understood the age-related recommendation to be driven by ageism, disagreeing with medical advice. Like P6, her approach is driven by the consideration of her future experience with MCC.

Seniors who had experienced conflicts in the past express concerns about conflicts involving potential illnesses more often, particularly those who experienced severe conflicts, such as P7. It is likely that they become more aware of this possibility after encountering a conflict.

Expected longevity is another temporal aspect that impacts MCC management, particularly among seniors. For example, P1 did not expect to live much longer, and chose to prioritize short-term comfort over long-term well-being:

“I was in the preserving life mode for a long time and then I gradually shifted over to comfort care. [...] I’m going to the dentist next week just to have my teeth cleaned. He would like to remove a lot of my teeth and put a new plate in and I declined that offer. I just try to keep my teeth as painless as possible.” (P1)

P1 refused treatments recommended by physicians when they involved short-term discomfort because he wanted his end-of-life to be peaceful. In this case, a temporal conflict arose due to the short-term focus of comfort care compared to the long-term focus of traditional health care services.

As can be seen in these examples, temporal aspects of MCC, such as past or future events, influence patients’ preferences and can create conflicts between MCC patients and their health care providers. Participants reported making choices that went against the recommendations of their doctors due to such conflicts. It is important to recognize that we cannot assume that a person with MCC will have the same goals as a person who is experiencing a single condition.

4.2. Patients’ strategies for dealing with conflicts
Our participants adopted multiple strategies to manage and resolve conflicts, including seeking help from health care providers; advocating for the needed health care services; deciding which condition, treatment, or activity to prioritize when facing a conflict; and building their patient expertise.

4.2.1. Seeking knowledgeable providers to deal with MCC conflicts
Our participants highlighted the importance of choosing trustworthy professionals, including health care providers, who are knowledgeable about all their health conditions and who take a holistic approach to their care. This guidance may help them to resolve the conflicts they encounter. When they find that their current providers are not attending to the complexity of their situation, i.e., not noticing or addressing a conflict, seniors actively and carefully seek out new providers.

A few participants explained how they chose the right provider and the importance of a trustworthy provider. For example, participants such as P7, who had a negative experience with a physician who did not identify a conflict, sought other physicians who were more knowledgeable. They tried to find physicians who they trusted to provide better care and prevent adverse events caused by conflicts. P7 explained:

“Loads of people graduate from medical school, but that does not mean that they have high standards and that they have great ability. [...] I found another physician. I explained to him the reason I was coming. [...] He sees you on time, he’s available, and he’s knowledgeable.” (P7)

Finding health care providers who listen, understand their complex medical conditions, and take their concerns seriously is crucial for our participants. For example, P6 explained that she valued how she and her provider collaboratively investigate early signs of complications:

“If I ever feel I’ve got a pain right behind my knee, or any swelling, I call [my doctor]. She knows that the time when you don’t do a scan will be the time when I’ve got a clot. So we’ve had lots of false alarms, but we just do it.” (P6)

Because they often experience unique illness trajectories, follow personalized treatment plans, and face particular risks, having the support of their physicians is crucial for seniors with MCC. They value professionals who collaborate with them and who are able to identify existing or potential conflicts and to help them to resolve these conflicts.

4.2.2. Self-advocating for MCC focused health care
To resolve the conflicts raised by having multiple conditions, several seniors interviewed in our study advocate for additional health care services. They actively ask to be referred to specialists when they judge that they need additional guidance to self-manage their conditions effectively, when they wish to change their treatment plans, or when they want help to handle a conflict.

For example, P7 learned from her research that she should restrict her diet after having kidney surgery. She explained how it was necessary to ask for a referral to see a dietitian since the referral was not offered to her and the hospital staff did not explain the diet restrictions:

“I asked a referral to a dietitian. [The doctor] said ‘why do you want that?’ I said, ‘I want to be put on a renal diet.’ I’m going to have this and I want to survive a little while longer. [...] It’s extremely important, and I think it’s the only thing that’s kept me alive.” (P7)

Similarly, P3 asked to see a specialist that could help her to manage her diabetes. She was interested in preventing future complications that would add to her current MCC:

“I sent a message to my primary care that I would like to see an endocrinologist that specializes in diabetes. I think it needs more tinkering.” (P3)

As illustrated in both examples, seniors sought providers that could help them to improve or maintain their health by addressing a conflict. They self-advocate to find a specialist that can help them to achieve their goals and to obtain referrals from other providers. According to the participants, seeking specialists who can better handle the conflict was particularly important when they thought that their physicians were not able or willing to provide the support that they needed.

4.2.3. Solving conflicts by prioritizing and compromising
Often, seniors prioritize and seek to balance the aspects of their health and daily life that are involved in a conflict. When the conflict arises, they evaluate their options in order to facilitate prioritization. Compromises may involve modifying treatments or altering daily activities in their personal lives.

Several participants reported seeking to balance their health conditions, treatment plans, and personal priorities. P6 explained that her doctor had advised her not to travel due to her Factor V Leiden, as it increases the risk of developing thrombosis. She followed his advice. However, after her husband passed away, she negotiated with her doctor to find a way to mitigate the risk associated with travel:

“I wanted to go to the High Sierra to scatter [my husband’s] ashes, so in August 2010 [my doctor] said to me, you can go if you stop three times on the road. [...] It was healing for me psychologically because I realized it was a pilgrimage to say goodbye to [my husband], but it was also a pilgrimage I needed to begin and continue grieving.” (P6)

In this case, the trip was important enough that P6 was willing to accept some health risks. P6 and her physician worked together to minimize these risks. As a result, P6 was able to find a balance between her personal and medical needs.

Additionally, patients often had to coordinate between different providers, and to prioritize the most important treatment at a given time. For example, to resolve the conflict between his treatments, P17 scheduled an appointment with a new cardiologist to ask about the risks involved in interrupting his medication. This additional information would allow P17 to know which treatment is more important, prioritize it, and find a compromise or alternative for the other.

Participants also consulted other professionals for advice on how to navigate conflicts. For example, some asked fitness trainers and physical therapists for guidance on what exercises they should do and how to do it safely. As P5 explained,

“The [fitness trainers] have taught me over time the various exercises I could do without harming my muscles. Or making them hurt more. I have two torn rotator cuffs. So I can’t do a lot of open arms, I have to be very careful.” (P5)

Learning from these professionals’ expertise can help seniors prevent injuries and balance their goals and limitations.

These examples illustrate how, when faced with a conflict, seniors with MCC evaluate their options, prioritize, and compromise or find an alternative. When presented with a new treatment that conflicts with an existing disease or treatment, this population seeks to evaluate the risks and benefits associated with each option before coming to a decision.

4.2.4. Building and leveraging patient expertise to address conflicts
Patient expertise plays an important role in participants’ self-care, as it informs the decision-making process used to prioritize and achieve balance. Individual physicians might not treat all of a person’s MCC, and might not be familiar with patients’ concerns. Thus, the patient is often the best person to make decisions. These individuals know their bodies, preferences, and priorities the best. Decision-making requires seniors to be informed about their conditions, the benefits and risks associated with treatments, and possible conflicts. They build this expertise through research, as well as learning from peers’ experiences and their own.

Most of our participants actively use the internet to seek health information. They research new developments in their health, such as when a health care provider mentions a new drug or new diagnosis. For instance, P17 reported,

“When [doctors] name something new. [...] I like to know what’s going on, and if someone gives me a new medication I like to go on the internet and find out what are the side effects.” (P17)

And P14 explained that she seeks information online because it can be easier to understand:

“When [pharmacies] send my prescriptions, they will send information. Lots of times it’s easier to go online and find out about it. A lot of times the medications are restricted, or perhaps there’s other medications you can use instead.” (P14)

Seniors build expertise on their conditions and treatment options by looking for information about their health. While they obtain information from health care providers, other sources can provide more accessible language. By gaining a better understanding of those topics, seniors become more aware of possible complications they may develop and side effects they may experience, allowing them to make informed decisions and advocate for themselves.

Participants also exchanged information, knowledge, and experiences about particular conditions or treatments with their peers. Through this exchange, they were able to learn from the lived experiences of others. For example, when P14 faced a major treatment decision, she turned to others to learn about their experiences with the medical procedure:

“When I was debating whether to have [breast] reconstruction, I talked to different friends about that. Some had had reconstructive surgery, some didn’t. And it was very helpful to just dialogue with them. What did they do, how did they experience it, how were the ones that didn’t have the reconstruction. [...] That was very useful.” (P14)

Knowing themselves and their MCC is another important aspect of decision making for our participants. They use the knowledge acquired from their past experiences, e.g., how their body reacted to different activities and treatments, to help them to make decisions. For instance, to personalize their physical activities, they rely on their knowledge about themselves, and on how they feel during the activity. As P10 said about her daily exercise,

“I try to walk two floors [every day]. It just depends on how I feel.” (P10)

Due to the diverse abilities and limitations imposed by seniors’ complex health situations, they become the best people to find the right amount of exercise for themselves. Based on the knowledge obtained from their own experiences, they decide what kinds of activities to do, and how to adapt them according to how they feel in the moment.

Participants are proactive in seeking treatment adjustments based on their own bodily experiences. For instance, P14 shared her experience of adjusting the prescription regarding the medication dosage:

“The doctor has given me pills that I could take every day. I don’t need to take them every day because it doesn’t hurt every day. So I adjust the medication on the basis of need.” (P14)

Self-knowledge is an essential tool for MCC self-care. It allows seniors to notice an existing conflict in their health management, and it informs their choices when they need to find solutions to conflicts.

These findings illustrate the different kinds of conflicts observed in MCC health management involving different conditions, self-care activities, past and potential illnesses, and activities in their personal lives. We found that seniors with MCC employ multiple strategies to resolve these conflicts, namely seeking help from trustworthy health care providers who are knowledgeable about their MCC, advocating for the needed health care services to resolve conflicts, prioritizing and seeking solutions for trade-offs, and building their patient expertise.

5. Discussion
This study reveals three specific kinds of challenges associated with conflicts among people with MCC: identifying potential and existing conflicts, making decisions to address them, and following personalized treatments as a result of these decisions. Technology designers could target each of these challenges to facilitate the work of people with MCC. Increasing awareness and assisting in decision making require supporting patient expertise and holistic systems encompassing the different relevant information, including medical history, risks, and patients’ values.

Consistent with previous work, these findings also provide additional contributions that help us to better understand how MCC conflicts occur, the challenges they create, and how we can use technology to address these challenges. Previous work has investigated MCC self-management strategies broadly, without focusing on conflict management, and found similar strategies such as searching for health information (Ancker, Witteman, Hafeez, Provencher, Van de Graaf, Wei, 2015, Corser, Dontje, 2011, Loeb, Penrod, Falkenstern, Gueldner, Poon, 2003, Zulman, Jenchura, Cohen, Lewis, Houston, Asch, 2015) and self-advocating (Loeb, 2006, Zulman, Jenchura, Cohen, Lewis, Houston, Asch, 2015). Due to the narrower focus in this paper, we are able to discuss how each of these strategies are used in the context of conflict management greater depth. For example, previous work has discussed how MCC self-management often involves prioritizing specific conditions that are perceived to be more important or impactful (Beverly, Wray, Chiu, Weinger, 2011, Corser, Dontje, 2011, Liddy, Blazkho, Mill, 2014, Schoenberg, Bardach, Manchikanti, Goodenow, 2011). We show how prioritizing also takes place in a more granular level when self-managing MCC, with each conflict being considered individually while taking several factors into consideration.

We situate seniors’ self-care strategies in the specific context of conflict management and provide a detailed description of how these conflicts occur, both in daily life and as a result of new developments in health. Because we studied individuals with diverse health conditions, these findings are not tied to specific illnesses. Rather, they reflect shared experiences and self-management strategies among seniors with MCC.

5.1. Multiple and single chronic conditions
While MCC shares characteristics with certain illnesses, it also involves its own specific challenges. The burden involved in MCC self-care is partially due to its complexity. Complex diseases (e.g., Parkinson’s disease, cancer) can include similar challenges, such as burdensome health information management and coordination of care between different providers (Nunes, Verdezoto, Fitzpatrick, Kyng, Grönvall, Storni, 2015, Piras, Zanutto, 2010, Riggare, Unruh, 2015, Storni, 2010, Unruh, Pratt, 2008). The strategies used to resolve MCC conflicts, such as seeking knowledgeable providers, patient expertise, and self-advocating for health services, have also been identified in studies whose participants did not necessarily have MCC (Bowling, Rowe, Lambert, Waddington, Mahtani, Kenten, Howe, Francis, 2012, Civan, McDonald, Unruh, Pratt, 2009, Meissner, Anderson, Odenkirchen, 1990). While these strategies and challenges are similar, they can be experienced differently. Seeking knowledgeable physicians can be particularly difficult for MCC patients. As our findings show, they must find health care providers skilled in anticipating and managing conflicts in health care and coordinate between their different providers to prevent conflicting treatment plans. Their patient expertise involves not only learning about one illness and its treatments, but about multiple illnesses, and applying that knowledge to evaluate risks and prioritize when a conflict arises. Self-advocating often happens after learning that there is a conflict that is not being acknowledged and managed. These circumstances affect how patients implement their strategies.

Having MCC makes it harder for people to “follow the script” to care for their health, i.e., follow health management guidelines for each of their illnesses, as existing guidelines are inadequate for this population due to incompatibilities between different diseases (Vogeli et al., 2007). Prevention of future illnesses or complications can be involved in conflicts as well, requiring prioritizing and making trade-offs. The conflicts that are specific to MCC, such as those involving multiple conditions or treatments, tend to be more difficult to detect and more dangerous. Due to lack of transparency from health care providers and fragmentation of medical care and information, both patients and doctors might not have enough information to become aware of the conflict. While conflicts are challenging for people with a single chronic condition, they are particularly problematic for those with MCC.

Conflicts involving factors such as values and financial constraints can occur without the existence of multiple conditions. These kinds of conflicts might be taken less seriously from a clinical perspective. For example, (Nunes and Fitzpatrick, 2018) describe how those with Parkinson’s disease often find the need to negotiate and compromise, as their limitations and other personal priorities make it difficult to follow medical advice. They argue that a medicalised perspective can view these instances as non-compliance, i.e., something that needs to be addressed using strategies such as patient education or monitoring. The illness-illness conflicts among people with MCC illustrate how it might not be possible or safe to comply with different guidelines at the same time, even when only taking into consideration the medical aspects of the person’s well-being. While there are arguments to be made about the importance of following medical advice, it is clear based on this study and on previous work that many people will find the need to make compromises and deviate from guidelines. It is important that they have resources that can assist in this task, such as technology designed with a holistic perspective that takes into account the different medical and non-medical elements involved in conflict management.

5.2. A “Lived Health” perspective for managing conflicts
As our findings show, self-care strategies are intertwined with multiple facets of seniors’ daily lives. Seniors take a holistic approach when managing conflicts by evaluating different treatment options in light of their illnesses, needs, goals, and limitations. They experience conflicts involving multiple treatments for different conditions, self-care activities, and past and anticipated health issues. They also use holistic strategies to address conflicts, such as seeking knowledgeable providers, self-advocating for MCC-focused healthcare, and prioritizing. Technology designed to support their self-care holistically would align with their approach to making health decisions (Kaziunas and Ackerman, 2015).

Previous work has argued for a person-centered, holistic approach to technology design, also called “Lived Health” (Kaziunas and Ackerman, 2015). A Lived Health approach frames illness experiences as inseparable from other aspects of people’s daily lives (Ballegaard, Hansen, Kyng, 2008, Brown, Weston, Stewart, 1995, Nunes, Fitzpatrick, 2018). While researchers have argued for using the Lived Health approach for specific illnesses (e.g., diabetes Chen, 2010, Mamykina, Miller, Mynatt, Greenblatt, 2010), it is particularly suitable for people with MCC. For this population, it might be impossible to follow traditional treatment plans. Conflicts require making decisions that involve complex needs and risks. These decisions can be overwhelming, leading people to abstain from trying to control or improve their conditions (Eckerblad et al., 2015). Assistance from Lived Health technology could help to ease this burden, facilitating the process of making decisions when facing conflicts. The temporal aspects leading to MCC conflicts create additional challenges for patients to keep track of information, particularly for older people, who naturally have a more extensive medical history.

This holistic approach to managing MCC stands in contrast to the current landscape of health management technologies which focus on single diseases in isolation. Fragmented self-management technologies, like fragmented health care services, lead to fragmented information. This fragmentation results in difficulty to obtain information related to conflicts and less effective health management among people with MCC (Boyd and Fortin, 2010). Existing health records systems do not account for patients’ values, although they are part of the decision making among seniors with MCC (Lim et al., 2017). Tools designed for specific illnesses make assumptions that may not apply due to the need to deviate from common strategies to manage conflicts.

5.3. Patient expertise in MCC management
Patient expertise is an major aspect of self-care (Civan, Pratt, 2007, Hartzler, Pratt, 2011), especially for seniors with MCC. Expertise helps them to understand illnesses, anticipate risks of developing a new illness or complication, self-advocate, find knowledgeable doctors, seek specialists, and make decisions. Addressing conflicts requires reflecting on several factors to make non-trivial treatment decisions. Decisions often deviate from standard treatment strategies. Being knowledgeable about their health also facilitates handling limitations and restrictions caused by MCC (e.g., related to diet and exercise), negotiating with health care providers, and coordinating between them. Because they see different physicians and have a complicated medical history, they also know the context of their illnesses best.

This population obtains information from varied sources. They learn from the guidance and advice of health care providers (e.g., information received during visits, handouts). They also conduct their own research about illnesses and treatment options. Similarly, previous studies found that many people with MCC look for information about their health online (Whealin, Jenchura, Wong, Zulman, 2016, Zechmann, Bobeth, Tscheligi, 2016). They obtain information from their lived experiences and those of peer-patients. Each of these elements contributes to patient expertise.

In order to support decision-making, people with MCC need rich information, including the rationale, evidence, and impact on health risks associated with treatment options. Existing medical guidelines are often inadequate for patients with MCC (Boyd, Darer, Boult, Fried, Boult, Wu, 2005, Marengoni, Angleman, Melis, Mangialasche, Karp, Garmen, Meinow, Fratiglioni, 2011, Ploeg, Matthew-Maich, Fraser, Dufour, McAiney, Kaasalainen, Markle-Reid, Upshur, Cleghorn, Emili, 2017), in part because they are simplified to describe recommendations without providing this kind of rich information. Making a choice between different recommendations is difficult without understanding the risks associated with each of them. Providing richer information would allow users to better prioritize guidelines, find alternatives, and adapt them to their situation.

5.4. Design recommendations
Technology designed for MCC care should promote awareness of existing and potential conflicts, assist users to make decisions when facing a conflict, help them to improve their patient expertise, and adopt a holistic perspective, taking into account multiple conditions and patients’ personal lives. These strategies represent a novel and potentially transformative approach to both healthcare technology and consumer-facing technology focused on conflict resolution. They could help to provide more support to populations with MCC than is possible with current technology. In this section, we describe ways technology design could strive to achieve these goals.

5.4.1. Promoting conflict awareness
As described in this paper, patients face challenges and health risks when they or their healthcare providers are not aware of existing or potential conflicts. MCC conflicts occur when different health-related factors overlap and are in tension with one another. These factors include treatments, self-care activities, and past or anticipated health issues. Overlapping factors are not inherently problematic. For example, a person with both diabetes and heart disease could use exercise to manage both conditions (Doyle et al., 2019). Electronic systems could be designed to detect possible conflicts and alert users by collecting data about health management factors that may overlap, and evaluating whether there are contradictory data points within the same factor.

Based on detailed health data, finding possible conflicts would involve examining if there are contradictions among the data points in each factor. For example, a patient who has heart disease and COPD might have the following data points under “physical activity”: recommended 120 min per week (heart disease), limited to low-intensity (heart disease), limited to 20 min due to breathlessness (COPD). Highlighting these data to patients and clinicians could support discussions about conflicts and possible solutions. If the data is mapped in highly granular detail, some of the work of resolving conflicts could be done by the machine. The example above could lead to the outcome of recommending to the patient 20 min of low-intensity exercise, six days per week. Artificial Intelligence could also be used to identify conflicts based on data from patients with similar conditions or contexts.

To support conflict detection, this system would require an information architecture mapping symptoms, treatment recommendations, and limitations into data labeled by specific health factors (e.g., exercise, diet, medication, blood pressure, allergies, symptoms, or disabilities). Such data could be obtained from different sources such as medical resources (e.g., Mayo Clinic, Cochrane Library), clinicians, patient health records, patients’ self-report, and patient generated data (e.g., self-tracking systems). Medical history data could be imported using health data interoperability standards such as HL7 FHIR (Bender and Sartipi, 2013). To account for temporal aspects of conflicts, it would be necessary to have comprehensive and up-to-date information on current illnesses, medical history, and risk factors.

Clinical decision support systems are commonly used in clinical settings, and one of their features is alerting healthcare providers about interactions between medications (Berner, 2007). A conflict awareness system would serve a similar purpose, but it would cover a wider range of data, considering other kinds of conflicts, and it would be used by both patients and clinicians. Promoting awareness about conflicts would allow patients to better understand their different options and support collaborative problem-solving between patients and clinicians.

5.4.2. Supporting conflict resolution
Decision making when facing MCC conflicts involves evaluating trade-offs and finding ways to compromise. This process requires holistic information about conditions, treatments, and risks associated with different decisions. Patients need to know not only what they should do to manage a condition, they also need detailed information that will help them to prioritize, compromise, and find alternatives.

To meet these needs, systems designed to provide health information to MCC patients should explain why a treatment or self-care routine is recommended for each condition, what risks exist in not following it, and whether there are alternatives, or strategies to mitigate risk when the patient is not able to follow the recommendation. For example, a person who has been advised not to travel by plane because of a risk of developing thrombosis could be informed about how likely they are to develop thrombosis from a 2-hour flight, how dangerous thrombosis is, whether there are ways to mitigate risks (e.g., getting up every few minutes, doing exercises while seated, wearing compression socks), and how effective these alternatives would be. This information would allow the person with MCC to balance the risks of the trip with the importance of the trip for personal, professional, or even medical purposes.

Conflict resolution might require assistance from physicians. Providing warnings or reminders to patients about asking for guidance from physicians could help to prevent inadequate decisions due to misunderstandings. Still, having access to such detailed information would be beneficial for people with MCC to negotiate solutions to conflicts they might face, inform their collaborations with clinicians, or help them to navigate situations where they do not have enough support from clinicians for MCC management.

Exercise and diet are factors with particularly high potential for conflicts because they are involved in the self-management of many conditions. Unifying multiple recommendations and restrictions could facilitate self-care by addressing conflicts and reducing burden. For example, a diet management app could allow users to select different options for medical and non-medical diets (e.g., vegetarian, low in carbohydrates, kosher, hypertension). Based on this information, the app could provide an integrated list of food options, recipes, suggested grocery lists, and meal plans. The SousChef app (Ribeiro et al., 2017), a meal recommender system for older adults, is an example of a similar system design. These resources could facilitate daily tasks such as cooking or purchasing a meal that are part of MCC self-care.

The need to find physicians with expertise to resolve conflicts could also be targeted by technology designers. A doctor rating platform that allows users to tag reviews by condition or conflict, and whose tags are searchable could facilitate the work involved in finding a doctor. This feature could help patients to find doctors that have a good reputation and also have experience providing treatment to patients with similar health conditions.

5.4.3. Promoting patient expertise and self-advocacy
Patient expertise and self-advocacy are important skills for self-managing MCC. Technology can be designed to support users with MCC to develop those skills. Providing detailed health information, as described in the previous section, could facilitate learning and contribute to patient expertise. Additionally, patients could benefit from learning about the experiences of other patients.

People who have or are facing similar conflicts could be an important source of information and support for people with MCC. Patient expertise is gained through personal experience through trial and error (Hartzler and Pratt, 2011). Patients could learn from how others resolve conflicts, how they self-advocate and collaborate with clinicians. For example, peer patients can share their learned strategies to handle conflicts, and those who do not have sufficient support from their clinicians can learn from peers about how to self-advocate.

Tools such as patient forums can help to connect individuals with similar health contexts and provide a platform for discussion (Hartzler and Pratt, 2011). Forums similar to Patients Like Me could be created specifically to help people with MCC by connecting users with two or more conditions in common. Using patient data, a MCC forum could suggest connections, similarly to “friends in common” features in existing social networking sites. Another possible feature would be to organize forum posts by illness tags rather than by subforums, and allow multiple tags per post. A post discussing a conflict between two illnesses could include both as tags, and users would be able to search or filter posts that include multiple specific tags.

Connecting with others facing similar conflicts could also be valuable, even if their conditions differ. For example, a person with diabetes and asthma and another person with hypertension and arthritis might face similar challenges to manage their physical activity because of the physical limitations caused by their health conditions. To connect these users, such forums could create subforums or tags for specific kinds of conflicts, such as those involving diet, exercise, or sleep. Providing spaces for patients to talk about conflicts involving non-medical aspects of their lives could also be beneficial. These forums could provide important spaces to help people with MCC to find support, share experiences, and learn.

5.5. Limitations
Our study has limitations. All participants had relative high SES and were highly educated. It is likely that their education level and access to health care services facilitated their ability to self-advocate and build patient expertise. The strategies found in this study are less accessible to low-income patients, who face more challenges living with MCC (Bayliss, Ellis, Steiner, 2007, Coventry, Fisher, Kenning, Bee, Bower, 2014). For example, financial constraints can also be involved in conflicts (e.g., not being able to afford a treatment).

Participants in this study were older adults with diverse chronic conditions. All were retired and many of them had physical disabilities. People’s experiences with health management might differ depending on their health conditions or life contexts. While some of our findings might also apply to individuals of different age groups, because our data was restricted to seniors, we are not able to identify what aspects of self-care are shared with the broader population of people with MCC.

Additionally, this study was conducted in the United States, whose healthcare infrastructure is fragmented (Gui and Chen, 2019). Our findings reflect the experience of people with MCC within the context of a fragmented healthcare system. This population might face different and potentially less severe challenges in contexts where different healthcare providers are better able to collaborate and share information.

Future work could study a younger population, or focus on specific conditions that co-occur. Investigating how the burden of self-care for different conditions influences conflicts in MCC is also an important direction to pursue, since different diseases might require different amounts of self-management effort and lead to specific kinds of conflicts. We also note that while this study did not investigate how primary care physicians can assist MCC patients to handle conflicts, this is an important direction for future inquiry.

6. Conclusion
We report the findings of an interview study investigating self-management strategies among older adults with multiple chronic conditions. Our participants adopted a number of strategies to tackle the conflicts caused by MCC. They encountered conflicts involving multiple diseases, their self-care tasks, and temporal aspects of MCC (e.g., past events, risks from treatment options). These conflicts led to three kinds of challenges: having awareness of existing conflicts, making decisions to overcome a conflict, and managing complicated treatments as a result of a conflict.

Patient expertise and the use of a holistic approach to health management are crucial for this population to be able to handle conflicts in their care and coordinate between health care providers. We argue that technology that aims to support self-management for seniors with MCC should provide clear and comprehensive information to improve patient expertise, support decision making to address conflicts, and allow users flexibility in their self-care work, such as setting their own goals and priorities.

Technology design for chronic self-management has tended to focus on single diseases in isolation. This approach is always going to be problematic for people who have MCC. Because 60% of older adults have MCC, this issue is most visible in the senior population. However, our design choices will affect more than just today’s seniors. The population is aging, and while we can expect to live longer, we can also expect an increase in the prevalence of MCC. Designers of technologies to support health management must grapple with this complexity, acknowledging it when designing systems for chronic self-management, and pursuing specific solutions for users with MCC.