Abstract
Psychological ownership defines how we behave in and interact with the social world and the objects around us. Shared Augmented Reality (shared AR) may challenge conventional understanding of psychological ownership because virtual objects created by one user in a social place are available for other participants to see, interact with, and edit. Moreover, confusion may arise when one user attaches a virtual object in a shared AR environment onto the physical object that is owned by a different user. The goal of this study is to investigate tensions around psychological ownership in shared AR. Drawing on prior work, we developed a conceptualization of psychological ownership in shared AR in terms of five underlying dimensions: possession, control, identity, responsibility, and territoriality. We studied several shared AR scenarios through a laboratory experiment that was intended to highlight normative tensions. We divided participants into pairs, whereby one participant in each pair created the virtual object (object-creator) and placed it over the other person's (space proprietor) physical object or space. We recorded participants’ perceptions of psychological ownership along the 5 dimensions through surveys and interviews. Our results reveal that the paired participants failed to form a mutual understanding of ownership over the virtual objects. In addition, the introduction of virtual objects called into question participants’ sense of psychological ownership over the physical articles to which the virtual objects were attached. Building on our results, we offer a set of design principles for shared AR environments, intended specifically to alleviate psychological ownership-related concerns. Herein, we also discuss the implications of our findings for research and practice in this field.

Previous
1. Introduction
Shared Augmented Reality (shared AR) technology enables multiple users to create, attach, and interact with the same virtual elements embedded into the physical environment (Azuma, 1997; Billinghurst et al., 2002). For example, the popular AR game Pokémon Go allows its players to coordinate their activities with each other, competing or co-operating in AR scenarios in real physical locations, and the Spatial augmented reality application1 allows both remote and colocated users to create and manipulate shared virtual objects in the physical space (e.g., sticky notes, 3D objects, and annotations). Common to these applications is an AR environment that can be shared between multiple users - the users can share the same view of virtual objects overlaid onto the physical environment (Billinghurst & Kato, 2002; Rekimoto, 1996). Thus, shared augmented reality creates an idiosyncratic “hybrid” social space where multiple users collectively interact with virtual objects as if those were a part of the material world.

Human-object relationships in social environments have been extensively studied in the field of material culture and discussed by studies of the psychology of material possessions (Adler, Csikszentmihalyi, & Rochberg-Halton, 1983; Dittmar, 1992; Pierce, Kostova, & Dirks, 2003a). Prior studies in these areas reveal that our behavior and social interactions are, to no small extent, regulated by the normative framework of psychological ownership. A classic definition of psychological ownership characterizes it as “The state of the mind in which individuals feel as though the object or target of ownership is theirs” (Pierce, Kostova, & Dirks, 2001). This definition emphasizes the experiential and subjective character of psychological ownership, distinguishing it from the legal definition of ownership rights. Thus, a feeling of psychological ownership is not grounded in legal ownership rights (Pierce et al., 2001). For instance, people commonly feel that they should not touch others’ personal belongings or intrude into one's personal space.

Psychological ownership is a critical factor to consider in shared AR (Poretski, Lanir, & Arazy, 2018). Our interactions with objects in the physical world, and the norms of ownership over these objects, are relatively well-understood. The unique way by which AR incorporates virtual elements into the physical environment (i.e., virtual objects anchored onto physical articles in the environment) makes it unclear how users of shared AR will perceive the ownership over these virtual objects. After all, in contrast to disembodied virtual objects such as computer files, embodied AR objects appear as an integral part of the physical world but vary from physical artifacts in the types of interactions that they afford and constrain. These variations in the types of human-object interactions that are afforded, may challenge users’ understanding of the environment and its elements, including the individuals’ interpretation of psychological ownership over objects in the environment, possibly resulting in normative ambiguities. For example, consider the case when a user of shared AR creates a virtual cat and places it on the other user's desk. Will the second user feel comfortable moving the virtual cat away from his desk? Would she feel required to ask for permission from the user that created the virtual cat? How would the virtual cat's creator feel when that virtual cat is moved without his permission? More broadly, does the creator of the virtual object feel that they own the object? If the creator of that virtual object were to attach it onto someone else's personal belongings, would the proprietor of the physical articles, too, experience psychological ownership towards the overlaid virtual object? Such ambiguities may lead to interpersonal tensions, possibly impeding social interaction in shared AR settings.

Equally important, virtual objects in AR environments possess unique affordances (Carrozzi et al., 2019) that may challenge users’ psychological ownership of the physical elements of the environment, further exacerbating normative tensions. For example, AR tools allow users to quickly create and replicate virtual objects and anchor them to another person's physical belongings or space from afar. Such actions may be perceived as unwarranted or even offensive by the proprietor of the physical elements to which the virtual objects are attached, thus disturbing the proprietor feeling of psychological ownership over the material belongings.

As of today, there is no commonly accepted understanding of how psychological ownership is created, negotiated, and enacted in shared AR, and our knowledge of the tensions and challenges that may arise in shared AR is quite limited. To date, the research on AR has been primarily focused on technological and usability issues, whereas research into the normative aspects of AR-based interactions is scant (Ens, Lanir, Tang, Bateman, & Lee, 2019). Our investigation aims to add to the body of knowledge on human-computer interaction and communication by focusing on interpersonal interactions mediated by people's relation to both physical and virtual objects in augmented environments. More specifically, we focus on two directions in which normative ambiguities can arise in shared AR around people's sense of psychological ownership. First, we study whether individuals experience psychological ownership over the virtual elements in shared AR environments. Second, we seek to understand whether the individuals’ feeling of psychological ownership towards the elements of the physical reality is disrupted when attaching virtual objects onto them. Finally, we ask whether ambiguities around ownership lead to normative tensions and impede interactions in shared AR settings.

Drawing from prior literature on material culture (Adler et al., 1983; Wallendorf & Arnould, 1988a), the psychology of possessions (Belk, 1988; Dittmar, 1992), organizational theory (Avey, Avolio, Crossley, & Luthans, 2009; Brown, Lawrence, & Robinson, 2005; Olckers, 2013), and human-computer interaction (Lee & Chen, 2011; Wolfendale, 2007; Zimmerman, 2009), we developed a conceptualization of psychological ownership in a shared AR environment, consisting of five key dimensions that characterize the users’ sense of ownership of virtual and physical artifacts: users’ perception of possession of the object or space, their sense of control over it, the users’ sense of identity which they associate with the object, their responsibility for the object, and their expression of territoriality regarding the object.

Using a controlled lab experiment, we simulated three social interactions between pairs of participants involving virtual objects viewed with AR devices. During the experiment, one participant created a virtual object and embedded it in the physical space or the second participant's belongings, such that both participants were able to view all virtual augmentations. Throughout this article, we refer to the creators of the virtual object as object-creators, and we refer to the owners of the physical object or space where the virtual object is placed as space-proprietors. We used a survey to measure participants’ experience of ownership to the virtual objects and conducted semi-structured interviews to understand the extent to which they felt the disruptions in psychological ownership over elements of the physical reality.

Preliminary results from these experiments were reported in (CSCW 2018)2, employing one part of the qualitative data that we collected and focusing on how augmented reality challenges users' understanding of interpersonal communication norms. Here, we use other parts of the qualitative data, complemented by survey-based quantitative data, and focus on users’ sense of ownership - along the above-mentioned dimensions - of both the physical and virtual layers of AR. Our findings show how shared AR technology challenges existing conventions of ownership, which commonly govern interactions in physical environments. The participants in our study reported that the virtual objects that were attached to their possessions or body disrupted their sense of ownership of their bodies, personal space and belongings. In addition, both object-creators and space-proprietors developed a sense of psychological ownership over the virtual objects and augmentations. Namely, both the object-creators and the space-proprietors equally perceived the virtual object as their own; both felt that they should control and were responsible for the virtual object, and both exhibited territorial behavior towards it. This symmetry in users’ feeling of psychological ownership toward virtual objects reflects an ambiguity concerning the shared understanding of psychological ownership between the individuals partaking in the interaction.

The paper continues as follows: in the next section, we review the existing research on shared AR and psychological ownership in the context of virtual environments. Section 3 describes the methodology of the study. Next, we present the results of the study in Section 4. The discussion in Section 5 highlights our contribution to the scholarly literature in the area, as well as provides suggestions for how to design AR applications that alleviate ambiguities over ownership. We conclude in Section 6 with a few final remarks.

2. Related Work
We begin our review of related works by providing an overview of relevant shared and collaborative augmented reality research, followed by a discussion on social issues in these environments (summarized in Table 1). Then, we discuss how psychological ownership was previously studied in different virtual and augmented environments.


Table 1. Summary of existing research on shared AR

Paper	AR Form-Factor	Context	Methods	Independent variable	Dependent variable
Novel technical approaches and techniques
Rowe (2014)	Projection mapping	Interactive museum exhibits	• System design • Observational study	Projection mapping with camera-based interaction technique	Immersion and engagement
Yasumuro, Imura, and Manabe (2005)	Projection mapping	Technical framework for projection-based AR system	System design	Novel projection method	Visual consistency of merging virtual texture on physical surface of 3D object
Rekimoto (1996)	Handheld	Collaborative view of 3D objects	• System architecture • Observational study	Shared augmented reality collaborative system	Mutual awareness of collaborators'
Sluganovic et al. (2017)	Head-mounted display	Secure pairing of multiple headsets into one augmented environment	• System architecture • Lab study	Novel security pairing protocol	• Success of pairing • Pairing time • Success of attack • Learning effect
Peitso and Michael (2020)	NA	Traffic management system	Conceptual design	NA	NA
System design and evaluation					
Cuendet et al. (2013)	Projection	Classroom learning support system	• System design • Field studies	• Integration • Flexibility • Empowerment • Awareness • Minimalism	Learning
Cheng and Tsai (2014)	Handheld	shared AR reading	• System design • Lab study	NA	Communication and interaction patterns
Guo et al. (2019)	Handheld	Collaborative co-creation of 3D objects	• System design • Lab study • Field study	shared AR Time-Space CSCW matrix variables	• Engagement • Participation
Kiyokawa, Takemura, and Yokoya (2000)	Head-mounted display	Collaborative co-creation of 3D objects	• System design • Lab study	NA	Collaboration support
Huang et al. (2019)	Head-mounted display	Surgical support system	• System design • Lab study	NA	• Task success • Completion time • Performance
Schmalstieg et al. (2002)	Head-mounted display	Collaborative modification and manipulation of digital objects	• System architecture • system prototyping	NA	Proof of Concept demonstration
Psychological and social aspects					
Kiyokawa et al. (1998)	Head-mounted display	Collaborative work	Lab study	Interaction modality (VE vs shared AR)	Collaboration efficiency
(Billinghurst and Kato, 2002)	Head-mounted display	Collaborative work	• Interface design • Lab study	NA	Communication and collaboration behaviors
Kiyokawa et al. (2002)	Head-mounted display	Collaborative work	Lab study	• AR Objects visualization technique • Communication space separation	Communication behaviors
Denning, Dehlawi, and Kohno (2014)	Head-mounted display	Informal social interaction	Field study	Wearing recording-capable AR glasses in public	Privacy perceptions of the bystanders
Poretski, Lanir, and Arazy (2018)	Handheld	Informal social interaction	Lab study	Attaching virtual objects to the physical environment in shared AR	Social tensions
Javornik and Moutinho (2017)	AR mirror	Informal social interaction	Field study	Viewing one's augmented self	Users' affective and cognitive responses
Javornik (2016)	Handheld	Retail experience	Lab study	• Interactivity • Augmentation	Users’ affective, cognitive, and behavioral responses
Hilken et al. (2020)	Handheld	Shared decision making in the context of shopping experience	Lab studies	• Point of view configuration • Media composition • Communicative acts	• Decision making • Recommendation comfort • Desire for product • Intention to use • Intention to tell others (word of mouth)
Heller et al. (2019)	Head-mounted display	Supporting purchasing decision	Lab studies	• Sensory control • Feedback modalities	• Willingness to pay • Decision comfort
Carrozzi et al. (2019)	Head-mounted display	Supporting purchasing decision	Lab studies	• Customization • Shared or private AR mode	Psychological ownership experience
2.1. Shared Augmented Reality
Augmented reality is a part of the mixed-reality user interface paradigm that enables overlaying virtual content on top of the physical environment (Azuma, 1997; Feiner, 1994). Whereas prior research on AR applications has focused on single-user experiences, the emphasis more recently has been on understanding the implications of the shared AR, wherein two or more users experience and interact with the same virtual layer (Rekimoto, 1996). The recent advent of social AR introduced a new type of informal social interaction in shared AR, involving users’ shared experience. The most common examples are Instagram stickers3, persistent AR mobile games, such as Minecraft Earth4, and other spatially aligned entertainment content that serves as the basis for the interaction between multiple users.

Several streams of research had explored shared AR from different perspectives. One stream of research investigated the technical approaches and techniques that can enable and improve collaborative AR technologies (e.g., Cuendet, Bonnard, Do-Lenh, & Dillenbourg, 2013; Kuzuoka, 1992; Tang & Minneman, 1991). In particular, multiple interaction modalities were developed, including novel input methods and different types of displays for implementing AR environments, such as HMDs (Kato & Billinghurst, 1999; Kiyoshi Kiyokawa, 2006), projectors (Rowe, 2014; Yasumuro et al., 2005) and mobile hand-held devices (Awan, Kim, Hong, Lee, & Kim, 2010; Grasset, Lamb, & Billinghurst, 2005). The second stream of research focused on design and evaluation of shared AR systems and the characterization and improvement of human-AR interaction in specific collaborative scenarios that can arise in a work environment. Such scenarios include, for example, remote expert guidance (Chang et al., 2007; Chénéchal, Duval, Gouranton, Royan, & Arnaldi, 2015), a shared workspace (M. Billinghurst, Kato, Kiyokawa, Belcher, & Poupyrev, 2002), telepresence (Beck, Kunert, Kulik, & Froehlich, 2013), content co-annotation (Onishi, Tanaka, & Nakanishi, 2017; Wither, DiVerdi, & Höllerer, 2009), and co-creation (Guo et al., 2019; Pan, Sinclair, & Mitchell, 2018).

Most relevant to our study is the third stream of research investigating the psychological and social aspects of shared AR interaction (Carrozzi et al., 2019; Denning et al., 2014; Heller et al., 2019; Hilken et al., 2020; Poretski et al., 2018). Several studies have directly examined the potential impacts of social AR on human relationships at the level of individuals, groups, and societies (Denning et al., 2014; Poretski, Lanir, & Arazy, 2018). Overall, it was found that shared AR interactions lead to the feeling of immersion and absorption (Javornik & Moutinho, 2017) and increase non-verbal communication between the users (Mark Billinghurst et al., 2002). However, shared AR may also amplify interpersonal tensions because of privacy (Denning et al., 2014), social identity, and personal space concerns (Poretski et al., 2018).

Users’ cognition and behavior in shared AR has been viewed through various theoretical lens. A few studies have analyzed shared AR interactions through the framework of socially-situated cognition (Carrozzi et al., 2019; Hilken et al., 2020). This framework describes individuals’ cognition as being constructed and affected by interactions with social environments (Semin & Smith, 2013). Indeed, shared AR interactions occur directly in the users' immediate social environment rather than in the abstract digital “space” on the devices' screens. Social cognition facilitates such interactions (Javornik, 2016). An alternative perspective for explaining users’ increased emotional responses to virtual objects in shared AR is active inference theory, which describes peoples’ perception of the world as a dynamic process that is changed with our actions, updating with each loop of action-feedback (Friston, 2018). For example, when considering a purchase of a physical item, people will walk around it, take it in their hands, turn it upside down, etc., to create its mental representation (Heller et al., 2019). Heller and colleagues (2019) found that AR reconstructs, at least partially, the same active inference process in perceiving virtual objects. For example, after placing a virtual chair in the physical room in the IKEA AR application5, users can walk around the chair, see it from different sides, etc. Thus, the brain follows the same process of initiating actions and receiving natural feedback, creating a mental representation of a tangible chair in a room (Heller et al., 2019). As a result, virtual objects in AR are perceived as more relatable than their virtual counterparts in an entirely virtual setting (Bonetti, Warnaby, & Quinn, 2018; Heller et al., 2019; Poretski, Arazy, Lanir, & Nov, 2019).

Because of shared AR's support of socially situated cognition and active inference, the users may perceive shared AR environments similarly to fully material environments. Consequently, the users may naturally adopt the social norms and rules of conduct that govern physical environments. However, despite their perceptual tangibility, the virtual objects in AR are still virtual. They possess unique digital affordances and lack unique physical affordances (Carrozzi et al., 2019). For example, AR holograms are ephemeral and lack solidness (Poretski et al., 2019) and possess infinite replicability and increased interactivity (Carrozzi et al., 2019). Thus, the existing social norms of the material world towards which the participants naturally incline may be unable to fully account for the presence of AR holograms in our physical surroundings. It becomes essential to investigate to what extent the differences between physical and virtual objects' characteristics in shared AR may disrupt the norms of material culture that were formed in the context of entirely physical environments.

2.2. Social Issues in Augmented Reality
Existing studies in the field of HCI emphasize that users’ responses toward technology vary depending on the social context of use (Brignull & Rogers, 2003; Marshall et al., 2011). Because of its connection to the physical world, social AR was shown to elicit strong social affective reactions, ranging from empowerment and inspiration (Olsson, 2012), to a sense of injustice (Paavilainen et al., 2017), shame (Albrecht, Folta-Schoofs, Behrends, & von Jan, 2013; Ventä-Olkkonen, Posti, Koskenranta, & Häkkilä, 2014), and loneliness (Olsson & Salo, 2012). Several studies investigated issues related to users’ privacy and social acceptability in the context of video-recording head-mounted displays and “data-glasses” (Denning et al., 2014; Koelle & Kane, 2018; Koelle, Kranz, & Andreas, 2015). From the normative perspective, the social use of this technology appears to be challenging because the acceptance of such technology by the public is initially low. For example, the wearers of the now-infamous Google Glass smart devices were often called “glassholes” by bystanders (Due, 2015). Some restaurants throughout the world even restricted Google Glass wearers from entering their premises6, stating that it was culturally unacceptable.

The technology's ability to perform discreet video recordings, which raises numerous privacy issues, is among the most critical concerns regarding the use of smart glasses. Other associated social difficulties include creating a distraction during social interactions, drawing disapproval from the general public (Koelle & Kane, 2018), and the need to perform ambiguous, unacceptable, and seemingly offensive gestures to operate the device (Koelle et al., 2015), all of which are exacerbated by the absence of any legal or normative basis for regulating its use in public (Denning et al., 2014). Denning and colleagues (2014) showed that despite the public's generally wary attitude toward the smart glasses’ technology, primarily because of its video-recording capabilities, the explicit design and explanation of the glasses’ functionality, coupled with the development of an appropriate code of conduct and clear communication of the user's intention can alleviate most of the negativity surrounding the technology (Denning et al., 2014; Koelle et al., 2015). However, the prior works described above, like most studies in this field, have focused primarily on usability aspects and users’ ability to cope with various audio-visual data streams. In other words, the glasses were mostly framed in terms of head-mounted “video-recording devices,” and the augmentation capabilities were largely downplayed.

The increasing availability and use of social AR applications have already led to the emergence of new normative social and ethical issues. For example, Pokémon GO, one of the most well-known AR games, attracted controversy when various public institutions (such as hospitals, cemeteries, churches, and other cultural institutions) started to object to the use of their premises as AR arenas (Peterson, 2016). our study explores AR-based interactions in a setting where several users can all view the virtual object. This social context allows us to move beyond an individual's perceptions to investigate interpersonal interactions and ownership-related normative tensions.

2.3. Experience of Ownership in Virtual and Augmented Environments
Prior research found that users experience feelings of ownership toward virtual objects (Buchem, 2012; Lee & Chen, 2011) and that usability and design are among the primary factors that determine whether the user develops a sense of ownership of the virtual environment and the objects in it (Lee & Chen, 2011). The ability to create, change, and manipulate virtual objects or digital informational content contributes to the development of psychological ownership (especially a sense of possession) of the objects (Barki, Paré, & Sicotte, 2008; Buchem, 2012; Lee & Chen, 2011; Raban & Rafaeli, 2007a; Sotamaa, 2010). The ability to control the activity and customize the virtual environment further fosters the user's sense of ownership (Buchem, 2012).

Wilcox (2006) found that, much like in the real world, in virtual reality environments, users have a sense of personal space. Participants exhibited significant discomfort when their personal space was violated. Even in conventional virtual environments, such as online video games, users think in social terms and adopt social conventions when interacting with each other's avatars (Ducheneaut, Moore, & Nickell, 2007), essentially operationalizing virtual environments in terms of the real-world counterparts. Consequently, users gradually start to experience psychological ownership and attachment to such virtual places and the objects in them (Lee & Chen, 2011). Even online communities that are not designed to resemble physical environments (e.g., Facebook communities, online forums, and digital learning environments) have been shown to facilitate a sense of psychological ownership over the digital content published on such platforms (Buchem, 2012; C. C. Marshall & Shipman, 2015).

The feeling of psychological ownership is one of the major factors that govern the behavior of users in a virtual environment. Strong experience of psychological ownership over a virtual place, object, or information leads the user to become more emotionally invested in the creation and development of the object or environment, and to spend more time actively engaged in online activities (Lee & Chen, 2011; Raban & Rafaeli, 2007a). Psychological ownership also increases the perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use of the informational system (Barki et al., 2008). However, users may also exhibit anxiety over the potential loss of personal ownership in a virtual environment, which may lead to withdrawal from collaboration and communication (Caspi & Blau, 2011). Reluctance to violate the ownership of their peers could likewise lead users to adopt avoidance behaviors (Bailenson, Blascovich, Beall, & Loomis, 2001; Caspi & Blau, 2011).

Addressing the scarcity of research of psychological ownership in AR, a recent study by Carrozzi (2019) demonstrated that the joint customization of virtual objects in AR by two participants led to the development of psychological ownership toward this object in both participants. The study showed that psychological ownership to virtual objects in shared AR grows via social identification with the object, and a feeling of relatedness to the object, further emphasizing the importance of social context in shared AR environments. Poretski et al. (2019) also found that several aspects of ownership and emotional attachment toward virtual objects emerged in shared AR settings. This study also directly compared AR-based interactions with similar interactions in a traditional screen-based virtual environment, demonstrating that users’ feelings toward virtual objects in the AR environment were more potent than those of the fully digital environment. The two studies described above indicated that users could feel psychological ownership towards the virtual objects in AR. These studies also began unravelling the mechanisms by which psychological ownership develops in shared AR. However, the consequences of psychological ownership in shared AR social interaction are still largely unexplored. Moreover, as AR combines virtual and physical elements of reality, the complex interplay between feelings of psychological ownership to virtual and physical objects in shared AR also needs to be further investigated.

We aim to contribute to this body of knowledge by investigating how the feeling of ownership over virtual objects affects participants’ interaction dynamics. We are interested in the situation when one person creates and places virtual objects (i.e., object-creator) on top of another person's belongings (i.e., space proprietor). Furthermore, we consider how the space-proprietor's feeling of psychological ownership towards the physical elements is affected when these physical elements are overlaid with virtual objects. In the following section, we describe our conceptualization of psychological ownership in shared AR that guides our investigation.

2.4. A Conceptualization of Psychological Ownership in Shared AR
Psychological ownership, as defined by Pierce, Kostova, & Dirks (2001), focuses on the individual's sense of possession. Psychological ownership has an affective character, and therefore may not necessarily align with the legal understanding of ownership. As a psychological construct, it was initially studied in social psychology and sociology in the context of material culture, focusing on human-object relations (Belk, Wallendorf, & Sherry, Jr., 1989; Dittmar, 1989, 1992; Wallendorf & Arnould, 1988a). More recent works, especially in organizational research, have extended the original conception of psychological ownership also to include intangible objects, such as employees’ sense of ownership to the organization, work team, or products of work. Moreover, organizational scholars identified other dimensions of psychological ownership beyond the concept of possession, including dimensions such as: control, identity, and responsibility (Avey et al., 2009; Brown et al., 2005; Buchem, 2012; Olckers, 2013; Van Dyne & Pierce, 2004). Research in the field of HCI discussed ownership chiefly in the context of possession, but also in other forms, and has studied psychological ownership in traditional virtual environments, such as IT systems, informational learning content, and video games (Barki et al., 2008; Buchem, 2012; Lee &Chen, 2011).

Augmented reality technologies embed virtual objects in physical settings. Thus, the mixed environments include traits and associated meanings of both the physical and the virtual world. Similarly, to a physical object in the physical world, people may feel a sense of possession over the virtual object, leading us to place the theoretical conceptualization of possession by Pierce and colleagues (2001) (also referred to as “belonging”; (Buchem, 2012)) at the core of our psychological ownership framework.

In addition to the dimension of possession, we reflect the accumulated understanding of psychological ownership by synthesizing research from the fields of material culture (e.g. (Wallendorf & Arnould, 1988a), social psychology (Dittmar, 1989, 1992), and organization science (Barki, Paré, & Sicotte, 2008; Olckers, 2013; Pierce, Kostova, & Dirks, 2001). We integrate and adapt prior frameworks to the unique context of shared AR. Namely, we identified five key dimensions that define a person's sense of psychological ownership in the virtual-physical space:

Possession - a feeling as though the target object or entity (or an element of that target) is one's own (i.e., it is MINE!) (Pierce et al., 2003a),

Control - the extent to which a person can apply personal initiative to perform tasks associated with the target object or entity (Avey et al., 2009; Olckers, 2013),

Identity - a cognitive connection between an individual and the target object or entity, such that the object becomes part of one's identity (Avey et al., 2009; Buchem, 2012),

Responsibility for the target object or entity, as well as the explicit privileges and liabilities associated with that target (Avey et al., 2009; Olckers, 2013; Van Dyne & Pierce, 2004),

Territoriality - protective behavior toward the target object or entity, and tendency to defend it from others (Olckers, 2013; Rudmin & Berry, 1987; Van Dyne & Pierce, 2004).

Below, we briefly review the related literature on these focal constructs.

2.4.1. Possession
As was stated earlier in this section, the experience of possession of one's material and immaterial belongings is a fundamental human need and is at the core of the perception of psychological ownership (Pierce et al., 2001; Pierce, Kostova, & Dirks, 2003b). Researchers of cyberpsychology and HCI have documented users’ sense of ownership toward digital objects in virtual environments and information systems (Buchem, 2012; Lee & Chen, 2011). In multi-user virtual environments, users may exhibit anxiety over the potential loss of ownership, possibly leading them to avoid communicating and collaborating with others (Caspi & Blau, 2011). Similarly, being cautious not to violate the ownership feelings of one's peers may lead users to avoid interacting with others (Bailenson et al., 2001; Caspi & Blau, 2011).

2.4.2. Control
Perception of control over one's actions and belongings is another important factor in our relationship with the social world (Pierce et al., 2003a). The sense of having control over an object is an important precursor to the development of a sense of ownership, and such feelings influence the kind of personal meanings that the individual assigns to the object (Wallendorf & Arnould, 1988a). Studies in the field of HCI have shown that users often strive to preserve control over their digital content (Barki et al., 2008; Odom, Zimmerman, & Forlizzi, 2011a), virtual 3D objects (Lee & Chen, 2011), and the work products formed in collocated collaborative environments (e.g., shared screens (Scott, Carpendale, & Inkpen, 2004)). Feelings of control experienced by the user during an interaction with a virtual object (or environment) were shown to foster users’ perceptions of ownership (Buchem, 2012). Prior studies have made the case that owners of the physical objects or space should remain in control during AR interactions and explicitly grant permission for such interactions to take place (e.g., Denning et al., 2014).

2.4.3. Identity
Identity defines “what and where the person is in social terms” (Stone, 1990). The construct of identity has both social and personal dimensions (Belk, 1988; Dittmar, 1992). In other words, the identity reflects both individuals’ inner experience of themselves and the communication of their perceived self to the social world (Dittmar, 1992; Hewitt & Forte, 2006). Disruption of one's sense of identity leads to the experience of embarrassment (Goffman, 1956), stigmatization, and may damage the individual's social and personal well-being (Goffman, 2009). Identity-related consideration influences one's tendency to engage in technology-mediated interactions (Rico & Brewster, 2010; Williamson, Crossan, & Brewster, 2011; Williamson Rico, Brewster, & Vennelakanti, 2013). For example, prior studies have documented the ways in which users incorporate the technological/virtual objects into their self-identity, imbuing those objects with feelings of relatedness, empathy, and attachment (Dittmar, 1989, 1992; Odom, Zimmerman, & Forlizzi, 2011b).

2.4.4. Responsibility
An important normative aspect of social communications is the notion of responsibility. Responsibility was mostly explored in the context of organizational information systems and identified as one of the key norms that regulate users’ engagement with informational objects (Avey et al., 2009; Olckers, 2013; Van Dyne & Pierce, 2004). In HCI, responsibility has been studied in the context of single-user AR and mobile interactions with virtual objects (Poretski et al., 2019). In this context, the construct entails: (a) the feeling of responsibility for the object's existence or “well-being” (e.g., being responsible for a virtual pet one cares for); and (b) the feeling of responsibility for the object's implications (e.g., when the virtual pet possibly offends others) (Poretski et al., 2019).

2.4.5. Territoriality
Territoriality is the tendency of individuals to protect the territory that they perceive as their own (Olckers, 2013). Territorial behavior is one of the ways in which psychological ownership manifests itself in social interactions (Avey et al., 2009; Brown et al., 2005). It is especially pertinent in regards to the body and one's immediate physical surroundings (Wilcox et al., 2006). Generally, social technologies may alter the need for personal space, or conversely, induce territorial behavior (Duncan, 1981; Pierce et al., 2003a). Overall, the existence of an area that an individual can define as one's own private zone is positively associated with a perception of privacy, safety, and well-being. When such a norm is violated and one's personal space is disrupted in a public environment, responses tend to involve territorial behavior, which heightens the possibility of social conflicts and tensions. The concept of personal territory or space is also relevant in virtual environments (Ducheneaut et al., 2007; Kellogg & Erickson, 2002; Scott et al., 2004). In such shared virtual environments, users typically adopt the metaphors of private and public physical spaces and explicitly reserve a certain area around them as their private territory or space to better manage their social relationships (Ducheneaut et al., 2007; Kellogg & Erickson, 2002). They also manifest territorial tendencies toward this area and wish to protect it from intrusion by others (Brave, Nass, & Hutchinson, 2005; Wilcox et al., 2006; Yee, Bailenson, Urbanek, Chang, & Merget, 2007). For instance, in a virtual reality simulation, users reported a substantial discomfort and negativity with regard to intrusions into their territory (Wilcox et al., 2006).

Addressing the gaps in the prior literature and based on the conceptualization of ownership in relation to AR, we formulated the following research questions:

RQ1: To what extent do interactions in a shared AR environment challenge users’ sense of psychological ownership over their physical possessions? Specifically, does the act of attaching a virtual object onto a person's belongings or body affect that person's sense of ownership over the material possessions?

RQ2: In what situation do ownership-related ambiguities arise in regard to a virtual object in a shared AR setting? Specifically, for which of the dimensions of ownership are the space-proprietor and object-creator confused over who owns the virtual object?

3. Methods
We conducted a user study in which pairs of participants were asked to create and manipulate AR objects in a shared AR environment, according to several social scenarios. The scenarios were designed to resemble typical ways in which shared AR is experienced in contemporary applications. To address RQ1, all the experimental scenarios featured interactions between virtual artifacts and the participants’ real physical possessions (or personal space). Moreover, to introduce the degree of tension and stimulate the participants’ reflection on how virtual artifacts influence their perceptions of reality, the participants played particular roles during all experimental scenarios. Specifically, one of the participants always served as a creator of the virtual objects (i.e., object creator), while the other participant always served as the proprietor of the physical belongings/space, to which these objects were anchored (i.e., space proprietor). To address RQ2, in all of the scenarios, both object-creator and space proprietor were able to experience and interact with the virtual objects that were produced by the object creator. Namely, despite not being able to create the virtual objects, space proprietors could observe and manipulate these objects once they were anchored onto their physical belongings/space. The experimental scenarios are detailed in Section 3.3.

We quantitatively assessed the participants’ perceptions of psychological ownership towards virtual objects via the questionnaire administered after each scenario. At the end of the experiment, we conducted semi-structured interviews investigating the degree to which the attached virtual elements disrupted the participants’ psychological ownership over their physical belongings.

3.1. Participants
Twenty-eight participants were recruited for the study. All participants were students at a large university with a diverse academic background: eight participants had a master's degree or higher, twelve participants held bachelor's degrees, and four participants had a high school education. The participants had a diverse socio-cultural background, growing up in: India, China, Ukraine, Netherlands, Israel, and the US. The participants' area of study also varied, including students from disciplines such as computer science and marine biology. Overall, the participants held an assorted variety of jobs ranging from physical labor to scientific research. The average age of the participants was 27.8 years old (SD = 4.70), with 12 who self-identified as women and 16 as men. Almost all participants had some experience with mobile AR applications, knowing or using at least the most high-profile AR-enabled applications, such as Pokémon GO, or the Snapchat/Facebook augmented camera feature. The participants’ proficiency with social AR technologies was 2.65 (SD = 0.70) on a [1–4] scale, measured using adapted Eastin's internet self-efficacy scale (Eastin and LaRose, 2006). The participants were asked to arrive in pairs, with each pair being acquainted with each other before the study. The level of their acquaintanceship varied from half-a-year to 13 years.

3.2. Procedure
We designed three experimental scenarios that emulated plausible shared AR situations. Participants were introduced to each of the three scenarios, and for each one, they were asked to imagine that they were in a particular social space, such as a classroom, as detailed below. We randomly assigned one participant to play the object-creator role and the other to play the space-proprietor. In each scenario, the object-creator operated a mobile device, which had shared AR applications preinstalled, and was instructed to use it to create virtual AR objects (or choose from the available options to instantiate the pre-made object into the environment) and then place the object either onto the space-proprietor's body or belongings or within the proprietor's personal space. Upon placing the object, the object-creator manipulated it – changing and moving the object.

Before beginning the experiment, we gave the object-creator time to activate the application and explore the available options. Only after the object-creator had attached the virtual object in the targeted location was the space-proprietor allowed to see the object (using a second mobile device) that had been attached to his or her body or belongings or placed within the proprietor's personal space. At the end of each scenario, both participants were asked to fill in a questionnaire, assessing the extent to which they experienced ownership over the virtual object in this scenario. That is, using the questionnaires which were based on the conceptual framework we developed, the participants indicated the extent to which they had experienced a sense of possession, control, and responsibility in relation to the virtual objects, and the extent to which they considered this object part of their identity and personal territory.

This procedure was repeated for the three scenarios. After completing all three, a member of the research team conducted a semi-structured interview with both participants, discussing their feelings, attitudes, and perceptions regarding all three AR-based interactions that just took place. The core questions (detailed in Appendix A) were related to the issues of who has permission and under what conditions one can create, view, attach, delete, or interact with the augmentations in each of the scenarios.

3.3. The Scenarios
We created three scenarios that differed according to the embedding of the virtual object (see Figure 1 for illustrations). The existing literature identified three distinct types of embedding: augmentation of self, augmentation of space, and augmentation of an object (Javornik, 2016). Extending these types of augmentation to social context, we created the following three scenarios:

Figure 1
Download : Download high-res image (296KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Figure 1. The three scenarios used in the experiment. (a) A virtual mask was aligned with the space-proprietor's face; (b) Virtual dogs were “released” into the living room of the space-proprietor;(c) a virtual item was placed on the space-proprietor's personal belonging.

3.4. Person
Participants were instructed to imagine that they are sitting together in a classroom during a class break. The object-creator was asked to activate the Facebook augmented camera application that enables creating virtual masks, stickers, and other representations, and aligning them with the person's face. The object-creator was instructed to point the camera at the space-proprietor and choose a sticker or mask (which appears on the participant's face when viewed through the app). (see Figure 1a)

3.5. Space
We asked the participants to assume that they were sitting at the house of the space-proprietor, casually socializing in the living room. The object-creator was instructed to activate an AR application that would release virtual dogs onto the living room floor, near the space-proprietor (who was able to see these dogs using her device) (see Figure 1b).

3.5.1. Object
We asked the participants to envisage an office setting in which they both shared a workspace. The object-creator chose one of three virtual items (a figure of a zombie, an action figure, or a model of a house) and placed it on the space-proprietor's personal belongings (her mobile phone or a backpack). (see Figure 1c).

3.6. AR Applications Used in the Experiments
We used existing shared AR applications to implement the experimental scenarios. For the Person scenario, we used Facebook Augmented Camera applet available within the Facebook application on iOS7, which enabled the user to point the camera at their companion's face. Once the application recognized that the camera is being pointed at a human face, it allows the user to select from a variety of virtual masks and invites the user to apply a particular mask to the face that is presented in the camera view. The mask reacts in real-time to the changes in the augmented person's head position and facial expressions and realigns the masks.

For the Space scenario, we used the entertainment application Puppy Dog Fingers8, which enabled pointing the device's camera at the physical environment around the user, presenting the virtual dogs moving around that environment. The dogs were spatially aligned with the physical surfaces (e.g., the dogs could run on the horizontal surfaces, but they did not run vertically nor ran into objects in the environment). Additionally, the dogs left persistent "dirty" footprints, and these footprints disappeared only after deactivating the applications. The user could direct the dogs' movement by tapping the area on the device's screen where they wanted the dogs to move to.

For the Object scenario, we used the AR Media Player application9, which searched for specific features (QR codes) within the environment; once those features were identified, it superimposed the virtual figurines on top of the objects. The user could "move" the object by pointing the camera to a different environment and tapping the screen.

3.7. Measurements and Data Analysis
We developed a scale for measuring psychological ownership of virtual objects in AR based on the conceptualization of PO detailed in Section 3, adapting, and extending the instruments used in prior works. We mostly built on the scale used by Olckers (Olckers, 2013), adapting it to the AR context. Where needed, we included items from other scales. Our scale for the five ownership dimensions included 3 or 4 items per construct (altogether 18 items). The dimensions of control and identity consist of 3 items each, and the dimensions of possession, responsibility, and territoriality consist of 4 items each. The full scale is presented in in Appendix A, and includes the names of the dimensions, the items, and the measurement instruments that served as the basis for our operationalization.

Translation to the local language followed standard translation protocols (Brislin, 1970). To examine participants’ responses, we conducted a three-way mixed Analysis of Variance, with the participant's role (object-creator vs. space-proprietor) as the between-subject variable and ownership dimension (5) and scenario (3) as the within-subject variables.

The contents of the interviews with study participants were analyzed qualitatively using the thematic analysis procedure described in Braun and Clark (2006). We used Atlas software to facilitate working with the textual content. In accordance with the goals of our study, we focused on a detailed description of the particular qualitative themes that reflect the participants' thoughts around social norms in shared AR social environments. Because we already conceptualized the focal constructs (i.e., ownership dimensions), we employed the deductive approach in the analysis (Boyatzis, 1998; Hayes, 1997), whereby our conceptualization of the focal constructs guided the subsequent formation of themes. We coded the data with a set of codes that indicated the scenario, the actor raising the issue (object-creator or space-proprietor), and the subject of ownership (directed toward the object-creator or space-proprietor). We then refocused our analysis on identifying the set of semantic themes (Boyatzis, 1998) pertaining to the five focal dimensions.

At the initial stages of the analysis, we read freely through the content of the interviews several times. At the second and third read cycles, we produced the analytic content - memos and side notes containing the research thoughts and ideas that emerged during the reading – attempting to identify low-level similarities and patterns within the interview data. After three cycles of going through the interviews, the data were imported into the qualitative analysis software (ATLAS.ti10). We then proceeded to generate the technical and analytical codes that helped us mark the content and organize it in a meaningful way, facilitating analytical thinking in the form of high-level descriptive and interpretative themes. The technical codes generated at this stage were associated with:

Personal characteristics of the participants: age, gender, and vocation;

The scenario in which the excerpted quotes were uttered by the participant: Person, Space, or Object;

The quality of the initial sentiment (if explicitly identifiable from the quote) expressed by the participant: positive, neutral, or negative;

The dimension of ownership (if explicitly identifiable from the quote) that the participants related to when explicating their answers;

Other normative concerns, outside of the scope of psychological ownership.

Following the formation of the technical codes, we proceeded with the main stage of analysis, in which we identified the high-level explicit and implicit themes on which we report in the qualitative part of the Results chapter. The research described herein was conducted in a non-English-speaking country. We performed the interviews in the local language. Subsequently, two independent researchers fluent in both the local and the English language translated the interviews into English. The translations were compared, and differences were discussed until a common understanding was reached.

4. Results
4.1. Psychological Ownership Questionnaire
To confirm the reliability of survey items, we submitted the questionnaire results to exploratory factor analysis (EFA) with Varimax rotation, using SPSS. Six factors emerged from the principal component analysis (PCA), corresponding directly to our ownership framework. Item loadings on relevant constructs were in the 0.64–0.91 range, above the 0.6 threshold (Matsunaga, 2010). All cross-loadings were lower than loadings on the relevant factor (all cross-loadings were below 0.35, with the exception of two control items with loadings of 0.41 and 0.45). The estimate for composite reliability for the constructs of possession, control, identity, responsibility, and territoriality were 0.90, 0.90, 0.89, 0.79, and 0.85, respectively, aligned with the recommended threshold of 0.8 (Nunnally, 1978), thus demonstrating good internal consistency.

Our measures demonstrated satisfactory convergent and discriminant validity. Constructs’ Average Variance Extracted (AVE) was 0.57–0.73 (greater than the suggested minimum of 0.50; Fornell & Larcker, 1981), providing evidence that supports the convergent validity of the proposed measurement model. We assessed discriminant validity by comparing the square root of the AVE (RAVE) of a particular construct and the correlation between that construct and other latent constructs. We found that the constructs’ RAVE ranged from 0.75 to 0.85, such that the RAVE for every construct was substantially higher than the correlation between that construct and all other constructs (interconstruct correlations did not exceed 0.5). In addition, we calculated Cronbach's alpha scores, which were above or very close to the common threshold value of 0.7, as recommended by Nunnally (1978).

4.2. Participants’ Perception of Psychological Ownership in Shared AR Interaction
Addressing RQ1, in this section, we describe the manifestation of psychological ownership in each of the examined dimensions of the psychological ownership construct. In each of the following subsections, we begin by describing the participants’ feelings of psychological ownership towards the physical elements (as well as the way in which psychological ownership was disrupted when a virtual object was overlaid the physical element). We then report on the findings from the quantitative assessment of both users’ – the creator of the virtual object and the proprietor of the physical element - psychological ownership feelings towards the virtual objects. Table 2 summarizes participants’ average scores for all dimensions of psychological ownership. The differences between average scores of space proprietors and object creators were statistically significant for the dimension of Responsibility.


Table 2. participants' means and standard deviations (in parenthesis) on the various dimensions of psychological ownership.

Dimension	Average scores of the participants across all three scenarios (SD in parentheses)
Object creator	Space proprietor	Overall Score
Possession	2.50 (1.51)	2.73 (1.63)	2.62 (1.57)
Control	5.80 (1.20)	5.41 (1.41)	5.61 (1.31)
Identity	3.35 (1.86)	3.02 (1.79)	3.18 (1.82)
Responsibility*	4.23 (1.85)	2.71 (1.60)	3.46 (1.88)
Territoriality	3.43 (1.47)	3.43 (1.81)	3.43 (1.64)
When analyzing the content of the interviews, we found that participants frequently perceived the attachment of a digital object to their body, personal possessions, or space by their paired companion to be unacceptable. Typically, this was because it disrupted their sense of psychological ownership. The thematic analysis of the interviews revealed that possible threats emerged in all five key dimensions and that the participants’ sense of ownership was associated with various normative tensions. In the subsequent sub-sections, we provide a detailed description of the topics that emerged, accompanied by representative quotes. Each quote is followed by the participant's code number, his or her gender, age, current academic degree (HSD11, B.A., M.A., or Ph.D.), and occupation.

4.2.1. Perceptions of Possession
Issues related to participants’ perception of the possession were primarily recorded in the Object scenario. We observed that when an object-creator placed the virtual element on top of the space-proprietor's physical item, the latter perceived that his or her feeling of possession over that item was jeopardized. The space-proprietors explained that they considered their belongings as objects that should not to be touched or handled by others, even in the context of virtual augmentations, unless the creator of the virtual object sought and was granted explicit permission in advance, i.e., before the interaction took place. Granting the other person permission to attach augmentations to one's body, belongings, or space was perceived by the participants as a form of "sharing," as the following quote illustrates.

I will not allow anyone [to attach any virtual augmentations]. These are MY personal belongings, which I would not necessarily share in public. MY stuff. Nobody can [attach virtual augmentations]. [P14, male, 31, B.A., programmer]

We found that the sentimental value that the participants assigned to their personal belongings to which the virtual objects were anchored did not affect the extent to which they felt that their feeling of possession had been upset. Even when presented with the possibility of an augmented doormat, one participant clearly explicated her concern over such an interaction.

It is just hard for me to accept the notion that someone meddles with my stuff, like, "come on, just leave me alone!”. [P2, female, 25, B.A., retail worker]

On the other hand, from the object creators' point of view, the very act of creating and placing the virtual item in the physical world led the object-creator to develop feelings of ownership toward the virtual object. For example, when one of the participants placed a virtual figurine on top of another participant's (physical) smartphone, he then argued that the amalgamated object composed of the real smartphone and the virtual figurine was now his.

It is my creation. And the creator is the owner. It is like the creation is mine, but the canvas is his. [P13, male, 30, Ph.D., academic researcher]

A quantitative analysis of the surveys revealed that participants assigned the dimension of possession an average score of 2.62 (SD = 1.57) out of 7. Overall, the dimension of possession was ranked the lowest of all dimensions. Object-creators’ assigned possession an average score of 2.50 (SD = 1.51), while space-proprietors’ average score for this dimension was 2.73 (SD = 1.63). The low scores on the possession dimension are likely because of the nature of the experimental tasks we employed in the study. Social scenarios were short and involved only basic interpersonal interactions. The participants did not engage in a lengthy process of creation; instead, they mostly selected from among a number of objects that already existed in the application. Even so, the participants experienced some degree of possessiveness, despite the relatively brief and simple communication scenarios. This suggests that the feeling of possession may play a role when the interaction in shared AR is more complex.

4.2.2. Perceptions of Control
In all three scenarios, we recorded instances where space-proprietors’ sense of control was disrupted when the virtual augmentation was attached to their physical objects, space, or body. The possibility of easily inserting AR elements into the environment led the participants to experience anxiety about their potential loss of control over the way in which social communication was conducted within the shared AR space. Experience of loss of control resulted in initial negative perceptions of the shared AR interactions.

I would not allow the situation where just a random passerby places something [on my body]. [P16, Female, 31, B.A., marketing agent]

In the end, participants firmly concluded that, at the very least, space-proprietors should be able to control who can place and view the augmentations in all circumstances. The creator of the virtual object should seek and be granted explicit permission for AR interaction in advance, i.e., before the interaction took place.

I am strongly inclined to think that I should be able to control the things that others put on and around me. [P15, Male, 25, HSD, electrical engineering student]

After the object-creator received the permission of the space-proprietor and placed the object on the space-proprietor's belongings, only these two interlocutors were allowed to control the virtual objects. Both participants agreed that no bystanders or other third party should be granted control over the virtual objects:

We would give permission to no one [in all three scenarios]. You don't know what people might do with this [object]. We would like to have full control over it. [P1, female, 28, B.A., office worker]

In the survey, the participants assigned an average score of 5.61 (SD = 1.31) out of 7 to the dimension of control. The scores for control were highest across all dimensions for both object-creators (Average=5.80, SD = 1.20), and space-proprietors (Average = 5.41, SD = 1.41).

4.2.3. Perceptions of Identity
We found that almost all the participants were very much concerned about the augmentation harming their sense of identity. This was especially evident in the Person and in the Object scenarios. Namely, when a virtual object that was created by one's partner was placed on a person's body, she often felt that her identity had been jeopardized, as evident from the following quote:

In the first scenario, it is too personal. It is the person himself. You place something on the person. It is not very nice. [P6, male, 25, HSD, student of geophysics]

The notion of intrusion was a recurrent theme in the discussion of how AR changes a person's sense of identity:

I don't want to say that this is something that relates to privacy, but it is something very close to it. It is something very intrusive, invasive. [...] it is something that relates to ME, MYSELF… You attach something to MY body. [P14, male, 31, B.A., programmer]

The quotes above imply that the body and intimate possessions are a part of one's definition of the self. The users highlighted that the shared AR setting creates an environment where defining and maintaining one's identity becomes a cognitive and emotional burden that requires constant attention and awareness. For many, even the mere thought of being "augmented" in public invoked anxiety and anger:

The augmented reality becomes also a very complex reality. Like, OK, you just pointed [a camera] at me, and that is it! I am now part of a virtual scene! I did not ask for it; it was not my choice, but now anyone can see me like this. It is very stressful...oppressive even. [P11, male, 28, B.A., accountant]

Several users voiced their anxiety regarding one particular kind of identity violation when the object-creator places a “mask” that resembles another person's facial features over their face:

People can start to use [this technology] maliciously. In fact, someone even can put another person's face on and go do something criminal... The technology could evolve you know... [P4, male, 33, M.A., teacher]

In the Space scenario, the identity was less pronounced. The augmentations were placed within the area and not attached to specific items or to the partner's body. Thus, they created less of a feeling of being identified with the virtual object of the environment. This led the participants to feel more relaxed in regard to identity issues in this particular scenario:

I would allow almost anyone to do anything [in relation to or when interacting] with dogs. [P19, male, 32, B.A., graphic designer]

In the survey, the participants assigned an average score of 3.18 out of 7 (SD = 1.82) to the dimension of identity. The identity dimension was the second-lowest after possession, with object-creators assigning an average score of 3.35 (SD = 1.86), and space-proprietors an average of 3.02 (SD = 1.79). This difference was not statistically significant. As in the case of the dimension of possession, it is likely that the simplistic social scenarios that were employed hindered the development of a stronger sense of identification with the virtual objects. However, during the interviews, the participants indicated that their concerns about identity were among the strongest, as they imagined the communication in the shared AR going forward and reaching a high degree of complexity and persistence.

4.2.4. Perceptions of Responsibility
In all three scenarios, the participants exhibited concerns over their responsibility regarding whether someone might be offended by the use of an augmentation. In particular, they were unsure who would be the responsible party if a virtual object (created by them or by others) within the shared AR space were to offend someone. They perceived that often identifying the responsible party might be impossible, costly, or simply unreasonable in a shared AR environment that encourages easy creation of artifacts, in a manner unconstrained by physical or social laws.

It is problematic [to identify the responsible party]. There are a lot of different people around; everyone can be offended... Anyone can sue you for virtually no reason; its complicated. [P9, female, 24, HSD, marketing agent]

Most of the participants were also noticeably worried that augmentations could be harmful or malicious. This was especially concerning because the participants assumed that the augmentations could be placed discreetly, without physically entering one's personal space and thus without making someone aware that her appearance was augmented.

You can [place] all kinds of ugly things on a person, and she would not be aware, and she would not know who had done this. And it will spread, like everything, viral. [P1, female, 28, B.A., office worker]

As a result, the participants stressed the need to establish a normative and regulative framework, which would govern social interactions in shared AR spaces, define who is responsible for what, and what is possible and agreeable to create. The participants were guided by their existing understanding of social norms in the context of existing online social platforms, such as social networks and multiplayer games (e.g., Facebook, Snapchat). Namely, the participants reasoned that what is accepted on such platforms may also be directly translated to the AR:

Well, if it's something that I post to Facebook, I decide who can see it and who can change [the content] in real time. I decide who is allowed to have access. [P11, male, 28, B.A., accountant]

In the survey, the participants assigned an average score of 3.46 (SD = 1.88) to the dimension of responsibility. This dimension received the second-highest score, with object-creators assigning it an average of 4.23 (SD = 1.85) and space-proprietors an average of 2.71 (SD = 1.60) on a scale of 7. The difference between scores assigned by the participants in different roles was statistically significant (t =14.04, p < 0.01), indicating that object-creators experienced a significantly stronger sense of responsibility for the created virtual objects. During the interview, we saw that this experience of responsibility was influenced by the fact that in every scenario, the object-creators had initiated the interaction. They created or chose virtual items according to their own preference and attached them to the space-proprietor's belonging or space of their choice. Space-proprietors were passive bystanders at the initial stage of the communication and only had the opportunity to see and interact with the objects after they were placed, without having the option to change them. Often, space-proprietors did not like the created virtual objects and wished to remove them. However, they had no such option during the experiment.

4.2.5. Perceptions of Territoriality
Finally, many users noted that the digital AR objects disrupted their individual territory or space. Territoriality concerns were particularly strong in the Space scenario, where the object-creators placed the virtual objects into the space-proprietor's personal space. The space described for this scenario was the home, a highly personal area for any individual, full of emotionally significant and personal items. Consider the following quote:

Let's say you put [the virtual dogs] in my room and there is the picture of my grandmother, and the dog walks on this picture and leaves dirty footprints. It is simply unacceptable... [P12, female, 38, M.A., graduate student]

The participants explained that the virtual object was just as likely to violate their sense of personal space as would a physical object. As a result, the participants wished to limit where the interaction could potentially take place, by excluding one's personal space from the list of possible places. They stressed that shared AR interactions should be regulated by a designated authorized body, to avoid conflicts of personal space invasion:

Here, we must address the issue of legislation. We should establish some legal protection - to protect people's privacy from such things... I don't want someone to look at me and say something about how I look [augmented] or intrude into my private space. In our case, we are very concerned about maintaining our privacy. [P15, Male, 25, HSD, electrical engineering student]

The “Person” scenario was also sometimes perceived as a threat to the invasion of personal space:

I feel like if I decide to [put something] on a person, I intervene in her personal space. If it is my friend, it is likely OK, but I still would not do this... [P11, male, 28, B.A., accountant]

However, we also observed how the placement of the virtual objects into participants’ personal space ultimately led to the incorporation of this object into one's territory and the object becoming a part of it:

I don't want someone to interfere with [the object]. It's like, for example, I don't want someone changing the channel on TV. It's the same – I don't want someone to change or add [to the object] because it's around ME. [P16, Female, 31, B.A., marketing agent]

As mentioned, the integration of the object into one's personal space evoked the strongest territoriality-based reaction, given that the scenario was described as occurring in the home:

Like, maybe I want the [virtual] dogs to stay here. It's my domain, I won't allow anyone to delete them. [P11, male, 28, B.A., accountant]

In the survey, the participants assigned an average score of 3.43 (SD = 1.64) to the dimension of territoriality. Territoriality was the dimension with the third-highest average score (3.43 on a scale of 7), as indicated by the object-creators (SD =1.47) and the space-proprietors (SD =1.81) (both object-creators and space-proprietors scored 3.43 on this dimension).

4.3. Ownership-Related Ambiguities between Object-Creators and Space-Proprietors
In this section, we present findings related to RQ2. We first conducted the linear regression analysis of participants’ personal and interpersonal characteristics (including: level of education, interpersonal trust, AR proficiency, and the tie strength between the participants) that influence psychological ownership scores. None of the characteristics significantly affected the outcome (education t=-0.61, p=0.55, tie strength t=-0.15, p=0.88; AR proficiency t=-0.45, p=0.66; trust t=-0.08, p=0.99). We then examined the psychological ownership dimensions in which ownership-related ambiguities around virtual objects arose in the context of shared AR. More specifically, we identified the cases when the psychological ownership of the space-proprietor and the object-creator did and did not align. Table 3 summarizes the means and standard deviations of participants’ ratings for all scenarios (Person/Space/Object), on each dimension of the psychological ownership scale, and across participants’ roles (object-creator/space-proprietor).


Table 3. Means and standard deviations (in parenthesis) of participants' scores on dimensions of psychological ownership by different scenarios and participants' role in the experiment

Scenario/Role	Possession	Control	Identity	Responsibility	Territoriality
Person	Object-Creator	2.55 (1.66)	6.24 (1.20)	3.71 (1.77)	4.71 (1.41)	3.18 (1.53)
Space-Proprietor	2.13 (0.99)	5.12 (1.23)	3.41 (1.80)	2.16 (1.25)	3.57 (1.85)
Space	Object-Creator	2.80 (1.44)	5.75 (1.05)	3.26 (1.81)	3.75 (2.06)	3.48 (1.22)
Space-Proprietor	3.07 (1.72)	5.58 (1.18)	2.86 (1.74)	2.96 (1.28)	3.25 (1.61)
Object	Object-Creator	2.16 (1.48)	5.43 (1.28)	3.07 (2.07)	4.23 (2.01)	3.63 (3.63)
Space-Proprietor	3.00 (1.83)	5.52 (1.66)	2.79 (1.71)	3.00 (1.97)	3.48 (3.48)
We conducted a three-way mixed ANOVA with the participant's role (object-creator vs. space-proprietor) as the between-subject variable and ownership dimension (5) and scenario (3) as within-subject variables. The results did not show an overall main effect for either actor or scenario, indicating that overall, there was no significant difference in ownership scores between the two types of actors (F = 0.63, p = 0.60). and that results were mostly the same across the three scenarios (F=0.03, p=0.88). This finding indicates the overall similarity in ownership perception between the object-creator and space-proprietor in all three scenarios (see Figure 2).

Figure 2
Download : Download high-res image (229KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Figure 2. Object-creators’ vs. space-proprietors' self-reported ownership perception (on a 7-point Likert scale) for the Person (2a), Space (2b), and Object (2c) scenarios, in all five dimensions

While the results were mostly similar across all three scenarios, we found a significant interaction effect between the dimensions of psychological ownership and the actor (space-proprietor vs. object-creator) (F= 3.5, p< 0.001). To examine the dimensions for which the scores between object-creators and space-proprietors were significantly different, we performed a two-way ANOVA with the participant's role being a between-subject variable, and the ownership dimension being a within-subject variable. Results showed a significant difference between the object-creator and the space-proprietor in the responsibility dimension, as the object-creator felt more responsible for the AR object than did the space-proprietor (F= 8.2, p< 0.001). None of the other dimensions showed a significant difference: territoriality (F=0.24, p=0.88); control (F=1.20, p=0.31); possession (F=0.14, p=0.71); and identity (F=0.31, p=0.59).

These results suggest that the levels of perceived psychological ownership over the virtual object were very similar between object-creators and space-proprietors across all three scenarios, highlighting the ambiguity over ownership that arises in shared AR situations. Moreover, when interviewing the participants, we found that this lack of clarity often resulted in tensions when the participants had trouble understanding the interaction in terms of explicit personal ownership. For example, in the Space scenario, one participant questioned who has the right to modify and add to a hypothetical virtual painting placed on the wall of the house:

If I go to his house and paint on his wall, and I don't, like, give all rights to him, it could be a joint agreement. He cannot modify my painting, but neither can I... [P13, male, 30, Ph.D., academic researcher]

Quite often, during the interview, the participants discussed the question of “who do you think owns the virtual object in this scenario?”. For example, in one of the interviews, the space-proprietor decisively claimed that:

Both her and I. I can do whatever I want – change or delete this [virtual object] and she too can do the same. [P5, male, 23, HSD, campus police employee]

However, the object-creator objected, raised the following argument:

I think [the ownership] is mine alone: only the creator owns it. Although he currently holds it, he has it, it is still mine, because the responsibility over it is mine. This means that it's mine basically. [P10, female, 21, B.A., economics student]

In the end, no consensus has been reached between these two participants.

Notwithstanding the examples above where the participants were unable to reach an agreement over the ownership of the virtual objects, the overall pattern of findings from the interview analysis did not fully align with the results from the surveys. Specifically, interview findings often demonstrated that on several of the ownership dimensions, the participants – regardless of their role in the simulations – commonly assigned ownership to the space-proprietor. Figure 3 organizes the comments made by participants according to the ownership dimensions and the perceived owner. As can be seen in the figure, for the dimensions of possession (26 vs. 30) and responsibility (30 vs. 41), comments were distributed mostly evenly (with the majority associated ownership with object-creators). Furthermore, in many of these instances, participants indicated that both actors should have joint ownership. For example:

Both of us [are responsible]. Because I [space-proprietor] agreed to this. So somehow it is a joint responsibility. [P14, male, 31, B.A., programmer]

Figure 3
Download : Download high-res image (227KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Figure 3. Number of comments related to ownership according to actor and dimension. Vertical lines in bars denotes the distribution of comments given by participants who played the role of object-creators (under the line) and space-proprietors (above the line).

However, in the dimensions of control, identity, and territoriality, there were substantial differences between the number of statements linking ownership to space-proprietors and those associating ownership with object-creators. Namely, most of the control comments focused on the space proprietors, stating that the space-proprietors should be empowered to view, change, or delete the augmentations (control: 74 vs. 31). Regarding the identity and territoriality dimensions, naturally, most comments were concerns by the space proprietor, as the identity (identity: 75 vs. 13) or the space (territoriality: 83 vs. 16) of the space-proprietor was the one to be compromised.

We believe that this discrepancy between the qualitative findings from the interviews and the quantitative results of the survey on these three dimensions was also related to the difference between the intended function of the questionnaires and that of the interviews. While the questionnaires were completed immediately after each scenario and assessed the users’ immediate feelings in relation to the interaction, the interviews were conducted at the end of the entire experimental session and were intended to encourage an open discussion between the pair of participants. We actively encouraged the participants to reflect on a variety of situations beyond those of the study and to suggest ways for managing ownership in shared AR social spaces. Thus, while the questionnaires demonstrated participant's immediate reactions about the ownership, the interviews reflected the perception of participants regarding the appropriate and optimal ways ownership should be managed.

5. Discussion
Our study investigated the experience of psychological ownership in shared AR, explicitly focusing on such social situations where one user creates and attaches virtual objects to the other's physical belongings or personal space. We found that both object creators and space proprietors experience psychological ownership toward virtual objects. The symmetrical experience of psychological ownership has given rise to a normative ambiguity, as it was not clear who the owner of the virtual object is. The tensions were further exacerbated by the space-proprietors’ feelings that attaching the virtual elements disrupted their sense of ownership over their physical belongings that served as anchors for the virtual augmentation.

In the field of HCI, the feeling of psychological ownership is recognized as one of the key contributors to the use of and engagement with professional information systems (Barki et al., 2008), virtual reality (Wilcox et al., 2006), and personal online environments and networks (Buchem, 2012). Moreover, previous research found that psychological ownership in multi-user digital settings helps regulate the relationships between the users, as it guides the decision on what constitutes acceptable and desirable behaviors in a particular social context (Larsen-ledet & Korsgaard, 2019; Monroy-Hernández, Hill, Gonzalez-Rivero, & Boyd, 2015; Raban & Rafaeli, 2007; Scott et al., 2004). To date, studies in the field of HCI have employed inconsistent conceptualizations and measures of psychological ownership. We contribute to the research on psychological ownership in HCI by integrating the results of multi-disciplinary knowledge in the fields of psychology of possession (Dittmar, 1992), anthropology (Wallendorf & Arnould, 1988b), and organizational science (Avey et al., 2009; Pierce et al., 2001). We provide a comprehensive conceptualization of psychological ownership to aid researchers and practitioners who wish to further explore this construct.

Our findings corroborate previous research on psychological ownership in AR that found that customization of AR holograms can lead to the development of psychological ownership towards these AR objects (Carrozzi et al., 2019; Poretski et al., 2019). We extend the existing knowledge by showing that engaging in the creation and customization of a virtual object in shared AR is not a necessary condition for the development of psychological ownership towards that virtual object. Rather, a sense of psychological ownership towards a virtual object in shared AR also depends on the physical settings, and specifically on the configuration of proprietorship over the physical elements. Namely, in shared AR, users’ ownership over their material possessions may bring about a sense of psychological ownership towards the virtual objects that are attached to these possessions. The space-proprietors’ feeling of ownership can be explained by the theory of socially situated cognition, which has been employed for explaining the development of psychological ownership in shared AR (Carrozzi et al., 2019). According to that theory, the attachment of virtual objects to one's possessions, space, or body may have helped assimilate the virtual object into the space-proprietor's social identity. Indeed, in our experiment, space-proprietors often explained that when the virtual objects were attached to them and became visible to others, they considered these objects a part of their projected social image.

Equally important, we contribute to the existing knowledge on psychological ownership in shared AR by showing that attaching virtual objects onto physical elements can disrupt the proprietors’ feelings of ownership towards their physical belongings. One possible explanation for this effect is provided by the theory of active inference (Friston, 2018), which posits that people's perception is updated with every action. Heller and colleagues (2019) employed active inference theory in explaining how the manipulation of the physical environment to which AR holograms were attached (and seeing these holograms updated in real-time with each change in the environment) reduced the holograms’ mental intangibility (Heller et al., 2019). Consequently, when a virtual object that is placed over one's material possessions without prior consent is perceived as “tangible”, it may challenge that person's sense of ownership over her possessions. This finding highlights the potential negative consequences of shared AR, pointing at the need for normative regulation of this novel social space.

Together, our findings highlight the importance of psychological ownership for interactions in shared AR. Previous research in sociology showed that infractions on psychological ownership could negatively affect an individual's well-being, resulting in an overall sense of deep psychological discomfort (Adler et al., 1983; Dittmar, 1992). In our study, this discomfort manifested in participants expressing their reservations and their ultimate desire to withdraw from such future AR interactions.

5.1. Design Considerations
The normative ambiguities and tensions surrounding shared AR environments, as were reported in our results, highlight the need to establish commonly accepted guidelines and policies that will regulate the behavior in shared AR environments, calling for external interventions on the part of legislators, policymakers, and the designers of AR applications. As shown in the current study, users’ attempts to adapt the existing behavioral norms of ownership to this novel form of computer-mediated communication were insufficient to render a socio-normative understanding of interpersonal communication, likely because of the unique affordances of AR. For example, easy replicability of the objects and the ability to place them from afar allowed particpants to place the virtual objects effortlessly and indiscreetly.

We argue that psychological ownership should be an integral part of the design of AR applications, ensuring a safe, enjoyable, and constructive social experience. Thus, we advocate for “ownership by design,” whereby designers and developers incorporate ownership-related considerations into the design of AR applications. Based on our study's results, we list below several high-level design aspects that need to be considered when addressing psychological ownership issues in a shared AR.

Ownership rights. Assuming that each virtual object has a defined set of owners (possibly, “all users”), a set of rules can then determine which user has ownership over the virtual object at each stage of the interaction, as well as rules for changing ownership between users. In our experiment, the participants’ difficulties in understanding who owns the created objects – whether the owner of the space, the creator of the objects, or some other party, led to confusion and, in some cases, hindered the interaction. In practice, this entails that a user who will be identified as an owner in a particular shared AR environment will be able to perform a number of actions that are unavailable to other users. Thus, it is the role of the designers to select and configure these rights as an inherent part of the application's design, based on their understanding of the role of psychological ownership in the specific application. Particularly, the application designers should embed guidelines for users to determine who should be the initial owner of the virtual object and the conditions for assuming ownership.

Attribution. Attribution refers to the existence of and access to the metadata about those who are associated with the virtual objects. Attribution is directly related to ownership rights. While the latter means identifying and assigning the specific rights to a user or a group of users, attribution refers to making the metadata about these users available to others in the environment, which may eliminate misunderstandings. In our experiment, the participants were concerned that anonymity might tempt users to discreetly create and attach potentially derogatory or harmful content, such as demeaning symbols or images that imply something bad about a person. Another example from the interviews concerns the act of vandalizing a social place by placing virtual annotations within it. Thus, the participants wished that there were some means to identify the person responsible for the creation, editing, and distribution of the virtual content. Previous work from online environments showed that attribution helps to establish responsible behavior and is critical for regulating plagiarism, reputation, and may facilitate fairness, and ethical nature of the use of digital creative works (Monroy-Hernández et al., 2015; Sinnreich, Latonero, & Gluck, 2009). Designers of shared AR applications will have to decide on the level of attribution of virtual objects in their applications.

Visibility. Visibility refers to the ability of users to see virtual objects. The need to control visibility emerged as a strong requirement by the participants, who often feared that the virtual items attached to their space, belongings, or body might expose them to unnecessary attention from other people in the environment. Thus, they wanted the items to be either completely invisible to others or to be only partially visible to others (for example, appearing as a basic abstract form instead of fully rendered). One particular example of this requirement emerged in the context of the study experiment was when the object creator attached the virtual mask onto the face of the space proprietor. The latter feared that many people would look at her and think she is weird. She wanted the object to be visible only to herself and, perhaps, to the creator. Another user suggested that the greater the viewer's physical proximity to the “wearer” of the virtual object, the more detailed and graphically complex the object should appear, while for those who are at a greater physical distance from the “wearer,” only a basic form of the object should be visible. We argue that the owner/s of the virtual object (as defined in the ownership rights feature) should be able to regulate how other users in the shared AR environment see the virtual object (if at all).

Interaction-ability refers to the ability of users to interact with virtual objects. The facet of interaction-ability stems from the study participants’ concerns that anyone could interact with the virtual objects attached to their belongings, space, or body, changing it or removing it. Similar to the visibility feature above, we argue that the owner of the virtual object should have the ability to define what exactly other users can do with the virtual objects.

These high-level design aspects are only partially present in modern shared AR applications. For example, in the previously mentioned Minecraft Earth application, the possible violations of one's ownership rights are acknowledged. Consequently, attachment and interaction with the virtual items is only possible in explicitly defined player zones. Recognition of ownership and personal space appears to be more developed in the context of fully virtual environments – video games, collaborative groupware, and virtual reality applications. It is understandable, given that these technologies are more matured when compared to hybrid AR spaces, and are less interconnected with the real physical, social setting. For example, in the standard non-AR version of Minecraft12, the game world's creator - a "host" - can modify the environment's interaction-ability, restricting deletion and modification of the game elements and structures. Another design principle – attribution - is often present in collaborative work environments, such as MIRO13 and Google Docs14. Notably, collaborators in MIRO can always check who created what elements in the environment and adjust their interactions accordingly. Similarly, the visibility principle can be observed in the virtual environment software VR Chat, where the user is able to change the degree of one's visibility to others and thereby regulate one's own private space.

Whereas ownership management principles have been implemented – at least to some extent - in other multiuser virtual environments, these principles were often not designed and implemented in a consistent manner. We hope that the comprehensive set of the high-level design principles that we propose in this section can benefit practitioners in the AR field and help them address psychological ownership in their applications.

5.2. Limitations and Future Research
Our experiment was performed in a lab-controlled setting, where the participants engaged in the interaction while the research assistant guided them at every step of the experiment. On the one hand, this setup allowed us to control for the environmental factors. On the other, this came at a cost in ecological validity, as is often the case in lab-based studies. Thus, future research should seek to replicate the study results in natural settings, expanding shared AR interactions to different kinds of public spaces: public sidewalks, retail stores, etc. A particularly sensitive context to consider is one that involves real estate ownership. Namely, social conflicts may possibly arise when augmenting a person's private property with virtual objects, as already debated in the technology-related discourse15. Such possible conflicts highlight the need to adapt the existing legislation and normative platforms to technological advancements (Conroy, 2017).

For our experiment, we used consumer-grade hardware (Apple smartphones and tablets) and software (applications available for free in the IOS AppStore). This enabled us to replicate to a large degree the shared AR experiences that today's users can already access via their standard equipment. However, the advanced form factors and interfaces now have begun to enter the consumer market, e.g., AR helmets and glasses, with stronger graphical rendering capacities and an increased number of natural user interface techniques. The combination of novel form-factors and interaction techniques may provide an amplified perceptual intensity of the interaction and a feeling of a virtual object's “presence” in the environment. Increased subjective perceptual “presence” of the objects, in turn, may lead to the escalation in the ownership-related tensions. We recommend that future research focus on investigating how psychological ownership emerges in a shared AR supported by novel interfaces.

Our study included pairs of participants who were familiar with each other. While we found that the level of acquaintanceship did not significantly influence the participants’ perceptions, participants who are completely unfamiliar with one other may respond differently to the sorts of interactions featured in our experiment. Thus, future studies should compare users who are familiar with each other vs. strangers. Additionally, our experiment mostly attracted college-educated participants, which may have decreased the study's ecological validity. However, we note that participants had diverse cultural backgrounds and professional occupations. Moreover, the correlation between the educational level and participants’ ownership scores was statistically insignificant.

Finally, when designing our tasks, we aimed to reflect on various social scenarios common in contemporary social networks, such as Snapchat, Facebook, and Instagram. All the above have adopted AR capabilities to some extent by allowing their users to align pre-made virtual objects with real-time camera feeds of the device. However, one of the much-lauded shared AR functions is the ability to support spatial collaboration, where two or more collocated AR-equipped users collaboratively create a virtual object in the same physical space. This task is exciting to explore from the psychological ownership perspective and should be explored in future research.

A particularly exciting direction for future studies of ownership in AR will explore the interconnection between users’ subjective ownership perceptions and the legal status of virtual objects. Attaching virtual objects in shared AR may be characterized as either an act of communication or an expressive work that is guided by copyright and fair use legislation. In the former case, the attached objects may perhaps be conceptualized as a form of free speech and expression. In the latter, such objects may be understood as "ownable" entities. In the conditions where legislation over shared AR is not yet fully developed and where a formal legal approach to the conceptualization of augmented environments has yet to develop, it would be interesting to study how the nature of virtual objects is perceived.

6. Conclusion
With the recent growth in consumer AR technology and the rise of multiuser AR applications, scholars have begun investigating psychological and behavioral issues in AR interactions. Some have argued that users perceive AR as not simply another interactive technology with extra features, but rather as a completely different modality (Javornik, 2016). If AR is indeed a new modality that offers novel ways of interactions, then it is essential that norms and rules are developed to govern social interactions in AR.

In this study, we investigated the phenomenon of psychological ownership in the context of a social, shared AR environment. We designed a lab-controlled experiment where pairs of users interacted using AR-enabled devices. One user played the role of the object-creator by creating virtual objects and attaching them to belongings, body, or space around the second participant, who played the role of space-proprietor.

Our findings highlight the importance of psychological ownership as a normative factor to consider in the design of shared AR applications. We showed that space-proprietors’ psychological ownership toward their physical surroundings was highly disturbed when AR augmentations were attached to their body, belongings, or personal space. This was often unacceptable by participants, who stated that this might reduce their willingness to use such technology. We also found that there is an ambiguity in the perception of who owns the virtual object. Both space-proprietors and object-creators developed comparable feelings of ownership toward the virtual object, which created various tensions between the participants.

To conclude, our research demonstrates how shared AR technology is experienced in the context existing social norms, specifically looking at psychological ownership as an important construct that may affect social communication and behavior. Addressing such normative issues in research and practice of human-computer interaction becomes ever more critical as the technology becomes widespread. We suggest that psychological ownership in shared AR should be considered in the design stage of the application and propose initial design directions related to how these issues could be handled in order to successfully create safe, enjoyable, and productive shared AR environments. We hope that our conceptualization will be useful for scholars who wish to explore psychological ownership in the context of augmented reality and HCI in general.